A Sheridan Story
From the Chicago Times
We were walking in the first snow of the season in the crowd, my friend and I, when we saw a picture of Phil Sheridan in a window. Stopping to look at it, although it is the one most familiar to Chicagoans, and the one, as I am told, from which the best crayons and paintings have been made, my friend took occasion to say that there was more expression in the face than any photograph he ever saw.
Then we went up the stairs to the room of the artist who had made the picture, and we assked him if there was anything of special interest in connection with the photograph, which we described. "Yes," the artist replied. "One day Gen. Sheridan came in here, in that quiet way so characteristic of him, and he said he must have some picture made for his family. He said he never liked to waste much time on matters of that sort, and wanted a date and hour in which he could come and get through quickly. I told him to come the next day at 11 o'clock sharp. He said he would be here. I had everything in readiness the moment he entered the operating room. He threw aside his cloak and said he was ready. I asked him if he had any preference as to pose. 'I suppose,' he said rather sharply, 'that you understand your business. It is not for me to say whazt post is best.' I thanked him for the complement. Then I pointed to a rug on the floor and said as sternly as I could, ''Stand over there,' and he obeyed like a true soldier. 'I want you,' I said, 'to think of what I tell you. I want you to think of the most serious moment of your life–to think, if you can, as you thought then. I want you to think of Winchester. Now, ready!' and I dropped the black cap from the camera. He stood there one and a half seconds. 'Did you think as I told you to?' I asked. 'Yes.' he said. 'And I actually forgot for the second that I was here.' 'That will do,' I said, as I removed the plate. 'You may go if you wish.' I knew I had a good negative. I was sure of it when I made my proof, and that picture that you saw, which so many people see and have seen, represents Sheridan at Winchester."