Philip Henry Sheridan, the heroic commander of the 
Shenandoah Valley, was born of comparitively poor 
parents, during the year 1831. It has been a matter of 
dispute as to the actual place of his birth, some persons 
giving the credit to Perry County, Ohio, while others have 
located it elsewhere; and it is understood that the subject 
of this dispute is not quite certain himself as to the exact 
locality where he first saw the light. The official army re- 
gisters place it in Massachusetts, and some disputants 
"down Easters" have quarrelled upon the question as to 
the part of the State that is entitled to the honor of being 
the birthplace of that gallant officer. Enough however 
is known of him to settle the point that he was 
born in the United States, that he has fought and 
won in the service of the United States, and that he has 
defeated the enemies of his country; and this is also enough 
to entitle him to the fullest respect of every one possessing 
the slightest spark of American feeling, without taking 
any further pains to enquire into the question as to the 
exact spot of his birth. 

Sheridan, or as he is better known "Phil Sheridan," 
was certainly a resident of Ohio during his very early days; 
as one little incident occurred in that state to fix that 
point with certainty. When about five years old, he was 
placed by some older boys, in fun, on the back of a spirited 
horse found grazing in the field, near where he resided. 
The horse was started of at a run; but the animal getting 
frightened at something it had either seen or heard, or per- 
haps both, dashed along at break-neck pace over rails and 
fences, and without bit or bridle. Every one thought the 
child would have been killed; but to the surprise of all, 
the horse, after a run of many miles, arrived at the stable 
of a hotel, where it had when with its owner been in the 
habit of stopping. Its sides were flecked with foam, and 
the animal was exhausted with fatigue — but the child was 
still on its back. The bystanders hardly knew what to 
make of the circumstance, and asked the child whence 
he came; to which question the boy at once returned a 
correct answer, but was not believed as the distance was 
so great. The hotel-keeper said he knew the horse well; 
but at the moment could not then tell who was the owner. 
The stable-keeper, however, soon settled that question; 
and on his asserting that the owner lived at the place 
named by the child, the little fellow's story was at last 
believed, and he was made the hero of the occasion. 

The adventure became the subject of village wonder; 
and the room of the hotel, that evening, was the scene of 
a large assemblage of farmers, and others, who had gath- 
ered together to hear the story repeated; and to see the 
child who had ridden such an immense distance, without a 
saddle or bridle. One good natured old farmer inquired 
where the boy had "learned to ride." 

"I never was learned" replied Phil. 

"Are you sure no one ever taught you to sit on a horse?* 
inquired the farmer.

"Oh! Yes," said the child; "Bill Seymour told me to 
hold on with my knees, and I did." 

"Were you not scared?" 

"Nary a bit," said Phil, "I wanted to go on farther, 
but the horse wouldn't go." 

"Well" said the farmer "I should think you ought to 
have been tired, as the horse certainly was. Are you not 
sore?"

"Kinder rather," said Phil. "But I will be all right 
to-morrow and then I'll ride back home." 

"Do you know your way ?" 

"No; but the horse seemed to know his way here; and 
I suppose he will find it back again."

"Well" said the farmer to his companions, "that boy 
has got courage enough to be an Indian cavalry hunter." 

Next morning the little fellow was sick and sore; the 
ride having galled him very much. He however did not 
seem to mind his soreness and wanted to go home, but the 
farmers refused to let him leave until he was free from 
pain. Meantime, the owner of the horse found out where 
the animal was, and went to claim him. When told of the 
adventure he said. 

"It is a wonder the boy was not thrown. The horse 
has nearly unseated me several times and I am said to be 
far from a poor rider. Although I feel vexed at having 
had to travel so far after my horse, I will see the boy who 
rode him all this distance in so short a time, and without 
a saddle." 

He saw and conversed with Phil; and left with the 
impression that there was more grit in the boy than had 
yet developed itself. 

The remainder of the boyhood days of Phil Sheridan 
was not marked by any very important events. He gained 
his education at the ordinary schools of that part of the 
country; and alter a time through the influence of some 
friends obtained an admittance into the United States Mil- 
itary Academy as a cadet. 

Young Sheridan entered the Institution at West Point 
during the year 1848. At that time it was difficult for any 
except the son or relation of a soldier who had served in 
the Mexican War to obtain an entry in that school of mili- 
tary science. He was at once examined by a competant 
surgeon, and subjected to a rigid and scrutinizing physical 
examination. He was declared sound in health and body, 
and capable of bearing a great amount of physical fatigue; 
and was therefore considered as a fit subject for admission 
into the Academy as a student of the military art. Col- 
onel Henry Brewerton was the superintendant of the Mil- 
itary Academy at the time of Sheridan's initiation. 

From the conversations of General Sheridan's classmates, 
it is ascertained that "little Phil" did not give any remark- 
able signs of brilliancy while at the military academy; 
being rather of the dull but retaining order of students. 
He was a long time before he succeeded in getting out of 
the fourth class, in which he was engaged in the study of 
mathematics, English grammer, including etymological and 
and rhetorical exercises, composition, declamation, geog- 
raphy of the United States and the French language. 

He was also taught the use of small arms, and the drill of 
an infantry soldier; and during the summer months per- 
formed the part of a private of the infantry battalionn in 
the camp of the academy. 

During the summer of 1850, Cadet Sheridan advanced 
one grade in the academy and was trasferred to the third 
class, in which he began the study of higher mathematics, 
under the tuition of Lieut. Sam. Jones, since Major-Gen- 
eral of the rebel army; French under Professor Agnel, 
and drawing under Professor Weir, in addition to the un- 
learned studies of the fourth class He also began to 
drill in the preliminary duties of a private of cavalry under 
Lieutenant James M. Hawes of that branch of the service, 
and spent sixteen weeks in the school of horsemanship, or 
riding school of the military academy. In this branch of 
education he progressed with : rpidity, although he was 
not so fortunate with his other studies. He however con- 
quered them all in due time. 

"While serving with the infantry batallion during this 
classical year, he obtained the selection of his services as 
corporal, and performed the duties of the position with 
credit. During the summer of 1851, he entered the sec- 
ond class of instruction in the adademy. 

The studies of a cadet increase as he advances in the 
academy, and if he is desirous of becoming an adept, he 
has a great deal to learn. When Sheridan therefore en- 
tered the second class, he found he had a severe task for the 
next classical year, which usually lasts from July 1 to June 
30, instead of beginning and ending with the year. From 
September 1851 to June 1852, he had to cultivate his 
mind in the study of natural and experimental philosophy, 
in the mysteries of chemistry, and in the art of drawing. 
He had also to train his body and develop his frame by 
daily exercise in the school of gymnasium, and also to re- 
ceive practical instruction in the more difficult and dan- 
gerous branches of horsemanship, such as being able to 
keep his seat when his horse becomers estive from the effect 
of a sudden report of artillery or musketry, and other sim- 
ilar exercises. 

While encamped during the summer months Cadet 
Sheridan was well drilled in infantry and artillery tactics, 
and while away with the battallion was selected as one of 
company sergeants. He at this time learned the method 
of properly keeping the company rolls and the other 
minutiae of documentary routine necessary in the after life 
of an officer, and without the knowledge of which no offi- 
cer should feel himself perfect in his military study. It is 
not only necessary that a regimental commandant should 
receive the papers from his subordinates, but it is also es- 
sential that he should know whether the papers are cor- 
rectly made out, and in due form. 

During July 1852, Cadet Sheridan passed into the first 
and concluding class of instruction of the military acad- 
emy. It is in this class that the young soldier is developed, 
that the cadet demonstrates whether he is fitted lor the 
position of an officer, by being able to command himself 
and thus show that he is capable of commanding others. 
Many a good subordinate has fallen through when he is 
first invested with the rank of a commander, and similar 
events have occurred to young cadets when first decorated 
with the epaulet or shoulder strap. In this part of his 
studies Sheridan is said to have passed through with 
credit. 

The young cadet's studies arc somewhat laborious in 
passing through the first class, and Sheridan's pursuit of 
knowledge was no lighter than those of his classmates. Dur- 
ing the time between July 1 and September 1 1851, he re- 
ceived practical lessons in the field in the sciences of civil 
and military engineering; and from the latter date to April 
1, 1853, he devoted his time to the more theoretical part 
of that branch of military art. On April 1, 1852, he re- 
sumed the practical part of the research, and continued 
thus employed until May 15. Although progressing fa- 
vorably, Sheridan displayed no great amount of dashing 
brilliancy in this study, engineering not being his partic- 
ular forte. 

Sheridan, however, during the winter of 1852-3 devot- 
ed himself to the perfection of his horsemanship, and left 
the riding school at the end of the term with credit and 
the approval of his instructors. 

His other studies consisted of ethics, constitutional, in- 
ternational, and military law, mineralogy, geology, and 
the mastery of the Spanish language. His more warlike 
instruction consisted of gunnery, ordnance and cavalry 
tactics. It is said that Sheridan at the academy was more 
proficient in the practical portion of a soldier's duty, than 
in the classical; but at the same time he is far from being 
uncultivated in his mind. 

On the 30th of June 1853, Philip Henry Sheridan 
graduated from the military academy in company with 
Major- General James B. McPherson, who was killed at 
Atlanta, July 22d, 1854; Brigadier-General William R. 
Terrill who fell at the battle of Perrysville October 8, 
1864; Brigadier- General Joshua W. Sill, under Sheridan, 
killed during the famous battle of "Stone River," Tenn- 
essee, December, 1862; Major-General John M. Schofield,
who commanded the twenty-third corps at Atlanta July, 
1864 and subsequently; Brigadier-General Robert C. Ty- 
ler, commanding artilery Division during the Virginia cam- 
paign of 18G4, and other fine officers of the United States 
army. The Rebel General John B. Hood was also a class- 
mate of Sheridan. 

It is true that the subject of ths biography did not carry 
the honors with him when he graduated; but he passed 
his examination with credit, and was declared perfect in 
horsemanship and in the practical knowledge of the use of 
the rifled musket, the field-piece, light and heavy artillery, 
mortars, siege and sea-coast guns, small sword, sabre and 
bayonet. He was also declared fairly proficient in the 
construction of field works, and the fabrication of all mu- 
nitions and material of war. 

With these qualifications Cadet Sheridan entered the 
army of the United States. 