Philip Henry Sheridan was born in Somersot, Perry county, Ohio, March 6, 1831, and was the son of Irish emigrant parents. As a boy his remarkable energy, courage and spirit attracted the attention of the congressman of his district, who scoured him a nomination to West Point, which he entered July 1, 1848, but did not graduate until July, 1853, having been put back a year for some boyish pranks that subjected him to the discipline of the military facalty. His rank was thirty-three in a class numbering fifty-two members. Grant's rank, it will be recalled, was twenty-one out of a class of thirty-nine members. Among Sheridan's classmates were Gen. McPherson, killed before Atlanta, who led the class; Gen. Schofield, Gen. Sill, killed at Stone River; Gen. Terrill, killed at Perryville, and Gen. N. B. Sweitzer, now in command at Fort Walla Walla.
After graduating Sheridan served in Texas. He was made a second lieutenant in the Fourth United States infantry, November 22, 1854, and came to Oregon in 1855. His service on the Indian war has been fully recited in The Oregonian's history of that conflict. He became first lieutenant of the Fourth infantry in March, 1861, and captain in the Thirteenth infantry May 14, 1861. In the fall of 1861 be was ordered East and served as quartermaster of the army of Southwestern Missouri from December, 1861, until the close of the campaign, which ended with the Union victory of Pea Ridge in March, 1862. He was appointed colonel of the Second Michigan cavalry May 25, 1862, and at once showed his mettle by defeating a superior force of the enemy at Booneville, Mississippi. In this engagement, fought July 1, 1862, Sheridan commanded his own regiment and the Second Iowa cavalry, and for his conduct was at once made brigadier-general of the volunteers. At the bloody battle of Perryville, October 8, 1802, Sheridan held the key of the position and greatly distinguished himself. At Stone river, December 31, 1862, Sheridan's division formed the left of the Union army's right wing. Two divisions gave way on his right exposing his flank. He formed a new line under cover of a charge, held out an hour; and then fell back and formed line again with Negley's division, repulsed three tremendous assaults, a bayonet charge and successfully withdrew his troops, thus saving the army of the Cumberland from utter wreck by gaining nearly three hours' prescious time for Rosecrans to to make new disposition of his forces. This fight of Sheridan's in the cedar thickets at Stone river where he stood off nearly hall of Bragg's army, made him a major-general of volunteers to date from this memorable day.
At Chickamauga, Sept. 19 and 20, '63, Sheridan again distinguished himself and rescued his division from a most perilous position when one-half the army was completely routed. At Chattanooga, November 25, 1863, Sheridan's division, the Second of the Fourth army corps, formed the center the column that broke Bragg's line on Missionary Ridge. His division reached the top first, pursued the enemy until after midnight and more than half the losses of the storming column were in his division. At this battle during the momentary pause after carrying the rifle pits, Sheridan rode to the front, bowed to the enemy, took out his flask and raised it to his lips. The enemy only a few hundred yards distant, saw him plainly, ceased firing briefly and cheered him lustily. When Grant was appointed lieutenant-generalf of the Union armies in March, 1864, he recalled Sheridan's brilliant, energetic and daring conduct at Chattanooga and made him commander of the cavalry of the Army of the Potomac. His services in the Wilderness battle, where he covered the left and rear of the army, justified Grant's confidence. Had not Sheridan checked the advance of the rebel infantry on the Orange plank road and foiled the movement of their cavalry under Stuart on the Catharpen road by beating him at Todd's tavern the result of the second day's battle would have been different. Stuart would have turned Hancock's left, fallen upon our trains and rear and practically accomplished what Longstreet aimed at when he tried to capture the Brock road. Sheridan whipped Stuart May 7 at Todd's tavern and again at Yellow tavern May 11, where Stuart lost his life. He whipped the enemy's cavalry again at Hawes's shop May 28 and at Trevellian station under Hampton June 11 and 12, 1864.
By direction of Gen. Grant, Sheridan August 7 1864, assumed command of the Army of the Shenandoah, consisting of the Sixth corps, Nineteenth corps, Eighth corps and three divisions of cavalry, forming a force of a force of about 30,000 fighting men. Sheridan had hitherto been known to the Army of the Potomac only as a hard rider and a daring, bitter fighter. He now proved himself the most consummate tactician in either army. He was at once cautious, vigilant, and subtle in preparation; as crafty, stealthy, and swift as a tiger in stalking his game he bounded with the fury of a tiger on its neck when he got within springing distance. From August 10 until September 16 he with Early for "the weather gage of battle," and secured it. Grant visited him, heard his plan, and left him with the simple order, "Go in." He "went in" at daylight, September 10, 1881, and, after a bloody, hard-fought battle, by sunset he bad sent Early and his whole army whirling through Winchester up the valley. For this great victory Sheridan was made brigadier-general in the regular army. Two days later, September 22, be defeated Early again at Fisher's hill. At Cedar creek, October 19, 1864, in the absence of Gen. Sheridan at Washington, Gen. Early surprised his left in the grey of the early morning, turned it and won so complete a victory that at 10 A. M. when Sheridan arrived, after a sixteen mile ride from Winchester, he found no artillery, save the cavalry batteries, no troops in line to oppose the enemy save Getty's division of the Sixth corps, and the cavalry under Torbert, Merritt, Custer and Powell. When he dashed up Gen. Custer kissed bim and Col. Tracy said, "General, we're glad to you here." "Well, I'm glad to be here; we're going to sleep in our old camps tonight," Then he brought up the Nineteenth corps and the rest of the Sixth corps, formed them on the right of Getty's line, weighted each flank with cavery and at 4 P. M. attacked Early, who had already attacked and been respulsed. After a desperate resistance during which the Union lines twice recoiled from the charge, Sheridan carried everything before him. The rebel army became a wreck, lost its artillery and trains and Early never again made head in the valley. For this great vietory, which tested the highest the quality of a great general, viz, the moral courage that enables him to refuse to accept defeat while there is a fighting chance for victory, Sheridan was made a major, general in the regular army, Abraham Lincoln dictating the order and making it read "for the personal gallantry, military skill and confidence in the courage and patriotism of your troops with which ronted army was reorganized, a great national disaster averted and a brilliant victory in pitched battle achieved for the third time within thirty days."
In this wonderfal campaign, in which Sheridan crushed Early, one of the ablest and most gallant of Lee's lieutenants, he took 13,000 prisoners and 100 pieces of artillery. The of the fighting cost Sheridan's army 16,052 men, including 3121 missing. In the battle of Winchester or Opequan his army of 30,000 men lost 5000 killed and wounded before the victory was won.
Sheridan, at the head of 10,000 cavalry, left Winchester February 27, 1865, dashed down the Valley to Waynesboro, where he scooped up 1600 prisoners, seventeen battle flags and eleven guns, the relics of Early's command, and after inflicting immense damage upon the James River canal and railroads of the enemy, joined Grant before Petersburg. March 31, 1865, Sheridan, supported by the Fifth corps, started for Lee's right flank at Five Forks. After two days' desperate fighting, April 1, Sheridan captured the position with 6000 prisoners. The next day, the entrenched lines before Petersburg were stormed, and that night Lee began his retrent. Sheridan followed on the shortest line, reached the Danville road and cut off Lee's retreat to North Carolina April 5. On April 6, Sheridan, supported by the Second and Sixth corps, forced the enemy's rear guard, 7000 strong, to surrender. On April 8, Sheridan reached Appomattox station and captured Lee's supplies, and by the morning of April 9, Sheridan's cavalry, backed by the infantry of Gibbon, Ord and Griffin, blocked Lee's path to Lynchburg and compelled his surrender. The war over, Grant instantly dispatched Sheridan with a army to the Mexican frontier.
President Johnson was displeased frith Sheridan's stalwart administration of affairs New Orleans, and, on August 17, 1867, issued an order for his removal. Grant, learning of Johnson's intention, as early as August 1, wrote the president in remonstrance, as follows, against Sheridan's removal:
"He is universally and deservedly beloved by the people who sustained this government through its trials and feared by those who would still be enemies of the government. It falls to the lot of men to do as much against an armed enemy as General Sheridan did during the rebellion, and it is within the seope of the ability of but few in this or other countries to do what he has. It is in my opiuion more than the loyal people of this conntry who supported the government during the great rebellion will quickly submit to, to see the very man of all others whom they have expressed confidence in removed.
Johnson issued orders for Sheridan's removal Aug. 17th, 1867. On the same day Grant in an eloquent letter again urged the president to stay his hand.
General Sheridan commanded the department of the Missouri from September, 1867 to March 4th, 1869, when he was made lieutenant-general. He made a successful winter campaign against the Indians, and forced them to surrender. In 1869 he assumed of the division of the Missouri, with headquarters in Chicago.
In 1870 Gen. Sheridan visited Europe, and through the courtesy of Emperor William was permitted to witness the stupid battle and disgraceful surrender of the French army at Sedan. In 1871 occurred the Chicago fire, when Gen. Sheridan, at the request of the authorities, assumed charge of the city and brought order out of chaos, protecting life and property from the thieves that bid defiance to civil restraint. On the retirement of Gen. Sherman in February, 1884, Gen. Sheridan went to Washington to assume command of the army.
Gen. Sheridan leaves a young and interesting family children and a worthy wife, the daughter of Gen. D. H. Rucker, U.S.A.