1872. 
February 9th, on the North Concho River, Texas, Indians attacked a 
detachment of three men belonging to Troop "B", 4th Cavalry, com 
manded by Captain Rendlebrock, but no casualties were reported. 

March 27th, near Fort Concho, Texas, a detachment of Troop "I", 
4th Cavalry, under Sergeant Wilson, were attacked by Indians of whom 
two were killed, three wounded and one captured, together with nineteen 
horses. 

March 28th, a band of Indian and Mexican thieves were attacked by 
a detachment of cavalry near Fort Conoho, Texas; two Indians were 
killed, three wounded and one captured. 

April 20th, Troops "A", and "H", 9th Cavalry, under Captain M. 
Cooney, 9th Cavalry, attacked a band of hostile Indians near Howard's 
Wells, Texas, killing six Indians. Lieutenant F. R. Vincent, 9th Cavalry, 
was mortally wounded. 

April 21st, Troop "C", 4th Cavalry, Captain J. A. Wilcox, were 
attacked by Indians in Texas and lost fourteen horses and two mules. 

April 26th, Troop "B", 3rd Cavalry, Captain C. Meinhold, attacked a 
war party of Indians on South Fork of Loup River, Nebraska, killing 
three Indians. 

May 6th, at Tierra Amarilla, New Mexico, a small detachment of 
Troops "E", and "K", 8th Cavalry, under Lieutenant J. D. Stevenson, 
were attacked by a band of Ute Indians, one soldier being killed and one 
wounded, the Indians losing one killed and one wounded. 

May 12th, between Big and Little Wichita Rivers, Texas, a detach 
ment of the 4th Cavalry, under Captain J. A. Wilcox attacked a band of 
Kiowas, killing two Indians; one soldier was wounded. 

May 19th, twenty-five miles from Fort Belknap, Texas, Kiowas 
attacked a party of citizens, killing one of them; two Indians were killed 
and two wounded. 

May 20th, a detachment of the 9th Cavalry and eight Indian scouts, 
under Lieutenant G. Valois, 9th Cavalry, attacked a small band of Kick- 
apoos on La Pendencia, Texas. 

May 22nd, between Fort Dodge, Kansas, and Fort Supply, Indian Ter 
ritory, a detachment of Troop " E", 6th Cavalry, acting as couriers, had 
one man killed and one wounded by Indians. 

May 23rd, on Lost Creek, Texas, a detachment of the 4th Cavalry 
under Captain E. M. Heyl, were attacked by Comanches ;md had one 
man and one horse killed. 

June 15th, a detachment of Company "H", llth Infantry, under Cor 
poral Rickey, killed two Indians in a fight which occurred at Johnson's 
Station, Texas. 

August 14th, near Pryor's Fork, Montana, a column consisting of 
Troops "F", "G", "H", and "L", 2nd Cavalry and Companies "C", "E", 
"G", and "I", 7th Infantry, commanded by Major E. M. Baker, 2nd Caval 
ry, were attacked by several hundred Sioux and Cheyennes. One soldier 
was killed and one citizen and three soldiers were wounded; two Indians 
were killed and ten wounded, most of them mortally. 

August 15th, on Palo Duro Creek, New Mexico, Troop "B", 8th Cav 
alry, Captain W. M. McCleave, was attacked by a war party of Indians; 
one soldier was wounded and four Indians killed and eight wounded. 

August 16th, near Yellowstone River, Montana, an expedition com 
manded by Colonel D. S. Stanley, 22nd Infantry, was attacked by a large 
body of Indians. 

August 17th, on the Yellowstone River, Montana, one man of Troop 
"L", 2nd Cavalry, Captain L. Thompson commanding, was reported 
wounded by Indians. 

August 18th, at mouth of Powder River, Montana, Companies "D", 
"F", and "G", 22nd Infantry, Colonel D. S. Stanley commanding, had a 
fight with Indians and again on August 21st and 22nd, on O'Fallon's 
Creek, Montana. 

August 26th, a war party of about one hundred and twenty-five Sioux 
attacked a detachment of one Sergeant and six privates of the 6th Infan 
try and two Ree scouts, twelve miles from Fort McKeen, (afterwards 
known as Fort A. Lincoln,) Dakota; the two Ree scouts were killed. 

September —, Troop "B", 2nd Cavalry, Lieutenant Randolph Nor 
wood, attacked a war party of Indians between Beaver Creek and Sweet- 
water, Wyoming, killing one Indian. 

September 19th, a detachment of one Sergeant and seven men, 4th 
Cavalry and two Tonkawa scouts attacked about fifty Comanche Indians 
in Jones County, Texas, killing one Mexican thief and recapturing eleven 
stolen horses. 

September 29th, Colonel R. S, Mackenzie, with Troops "A", "D", 
"F", "I", and "L", 4th Cavalry, attacked a village of about two hundred 
lodges of Comanches near north Fork of Red River, Texas, destroyed the 
same with its contents, killed twenty-three warriors and captured between 
one hundred and twenty and one hundred and thirty prisoners. One 
enlisted man was killed and three wounded, together with a number of 
cavalry horses killed and wounded. A large number of horses and mules 
were captured from the Indians.

October 2nd, about three hundred Sioux attacked Fort McKeen, (Fort 
A. Lincoln), Dakota, wounding one and killing three Ree scouts. 

October 3rd, in Jones County, Texas, a detachment of Tonkawa 
scouts made an attack upon a camp of Comanches; no details given. 

October 3rd and 4th, near Heart River, Dakota, Lieutenant E. Crosby, 
17th Infantry, Lieutenant L. D. Adair, 22nd Infantry and one civilian 
whilst hunting were attacked and killed by Sioux Indians. 

October 14th, Fort McKeen, (Fort A. Lincoln,) Dakota, was again 
attacked by a large body of Sioux. Troops from the garrison, consisting 
of one company 6th Infantry and eight Ree scouts attacked the Indians, 
killing three of them and losing two enlisted men killed. 

December 6th, near the Rio Grande, Texas, Sergeant Bruce and six 
men, 9th Cavalry, attacked a band of Mexican cattle thieves and recap 
tured fifty-nine head of stolen cattle. 

During the year 1872, no general Indian war took place in the Divi 
sion, but the number of murders and. depredations committed by small 
war parties in various places was greater than during the preceding year. 
The line of frontier settlements had steadily advanced during the year, 
especially in Kansas, Nebraska, Minnesota and Dakota, gradually absorb 
ing the country which only a year or two before was in the possession of 
the Indians, and the trans-continental railway lines were progressing 
rapidly westward through the Division. The Northern Pacific Railroad 
had reached the Missouri River about the close of the year, the actual 
surveys and locations for the roadway being made as far west as the 
mouth of the Powder River, two hundred miles beyond the Missouri. 
The Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Railway was extended as far west 
as Fort Dodge, Kansas, in its progress up the valley of the Arkansas, 
while surveying parties for the Southern Pacific Railway were engaged 
in locating the line of that road in both directions from the vicinity of 
El Paso. For the protection of the surveyors and the construction par 
ties upon all these lines, a considerable force of troops was necessary as 
escorts, and minor engagements between Indians and these small detach 
ments were of repeated occurrence. The guarding of the Rio Grande 
frontier against the incursions of border thieves consisting of Mexicans, 
half-breeds and Indians, also furnished occasion for considerable activity 
on the part of the troops in that portion of the Division, involving con 
stant watchfulness and much patient endurance. 