1871.
February 17th, near Fort Bayard, New Mexico, Indians raided the 
ranches, murdered the settlers and ran off stock. Troops pursued the 
Indians to the mountains, burned their village, destroyed its contents and 
recovered many of the stolen animals. One soldier was killed and two 
wounded; of the Indians fourteen were reported killed arid twenty 
wounded. 

February 26th, near Grinnell, Kansas, Indians attacked a hunter's 
camp, burned it and ran off the stock. 

March 18th, near Fort Dodge, Kansas, Indians made repeated attacks 
upon a government train, three men being killed and five Indians 
wounded in the various attacks. 

April 30th, Apache Indians from Arizona depredated in Colorado and 
killed, altogether, twenty persons. 

May 2nd, Apaches committed depredations near Fort Selden, New 
Mexico. A troop of cavalry pursu.ed them for two hundred and eighty 
miles but without success. 

May 3rd, near Gimmaron, New Mexico, Indians raided the settlements, 
killed three persons and ran off about nine hundred and fifty head of 
stock. Troops pursued, captured twenty-two Indians and recovered 
seven hundred and fifty-seven head of the stolen animals. 

May llth, Major Price, with a squadron of the 8th Cavalry, pursued a 
band of marauding Navajoes, in New Mexico, captured two prominent 
chiefs and recovered a large number of stolen animals. 

May 12th, Indians ran off stock near Red River, Texas. Troops from 
Fort Sill, Indian Territory, pursued and defeated the Indians who lost 
three killed and four wounded; no casualties to the troops. 

May 15th, Indians stampeded twenty-two mules from a government 
train in New Mexico. 

May 17th, Indians attacked a train on Red River, killing seven per 
sons, wounding one and running qff forty-one mules. Going to Fort Sill, 
Indian Territory, they publicly avowed the deed in the presence of 
General Sherman and the post commander, whereupon the leaders, 
"Satanta" and "Satank", were arrested and placed in irons. Their followers
resisted, when one Indian was killed and one soldier wounded. 

May 24th, on Birdwood Creek, Nebraska, a detachment of 5th Cav 
alry, under Lieutenant E. M. Hayes, captured six Indians. 

May 29th, in the Department of the Missouri, cavalry pursued a band 
of Indians and recaptured five hundred stolen animals. 

June 28th, near Larned, Kansas, Indians ran off fourteen horses; near 
Pawnee Fork, Kansas, they also stole seventy mules. 

July 2nd, Fort Larned, Kansas, was attacked by Indians who were 
repulsed by the garrison; no casualties. 

August 18th, Indians killed a settler and ran off his stock, twelve 
miles from Fort Stanton, New Mexico. Troops pursued, but without 
success. 

September 19th, a small detachment of troops was attacked by Indians 
near Red River, Indian Territory. One soldier was wounded, two 
Indians killed and three wounded. 

September 22nd, near Fort Sill, Indian Territory, Indians killed two 
citizen herders and ran off about fifteen head of stock. 