1873.
During the year 1873, the depredations of raiding parties of Mexican 
thieves, Indians and half-breeds in the vicinity of the Rio Grande con 
tinued, as did also the attacks by Indians upon the military posts and 
field escort detachments guarding the surveying and construction parties 
engaged upon the lines of railway. 

April 30th, Lieutenant Harmon, with eleven men of the 10th Cavalry, 
attacked a band of Mexican thieves about seven miles south east of Fort 
Sill, Indian Territory, and recaptured thirty-six horses. 

May 7th, about one hundred Sioux attacked the post of Fort A. Lin 
coln, Dakota, (previously known as Fort McKeen,) garrisoned by
Companies "B", and "C", 6th Infantry and Company "H", 17th Infantry, 
commanded by Lieutenant Colonel W. P. Carlin, 17th Infantry. The 
Indians were driven off with a loss of one killed and three wounded. 

May 18th, Colonel R. S. MacKenzie, 4th Cavalry, with Troops "A", 
"B", "C", "E", "I", and "M", of his regiment and a detachment of 
Seminole scouts under Lieutenant Bullis, 24th Infantry, attacked and 
destroyed a village of fifty or sixty lodges of Kickapoos and Lipan 
Indians near Remolina, Mexico, killing nineteen Indians, taking forty 
prisoners and capturing fifty-six horses. The column marched at a trot 
or a gallop a distance of seventy -five miles, between one o'clock in the 
afternoon of the previous day and six o'clock in the morning of the day 
of the attack, in order to reach and surprise this village whose location 
had been reported. The pack train of supplies was dropped during this 
rapid march and for two days the troops were without other rations than 
a few crackers carried in their pockets. Amonqr the prisoners taken was 
Costilietos, the principal chief of the Lipans. 

June 15th and 17th, Sioux Indians again made two separate attacks 
upon the post of Fort A. Lincoln, Dakota. The garrison, constituted as 
before described under Lieutenant Colonel Carlin, 17th Infantry, repulsed 
the attack, one Ree scout being wounded, three Sioux killed and eight 
wounded. 

July 12th, on Live Oak Creek, Indian Territory, Troop "L", 4th Cav 
alry, Captain T. J. Wint commanding, attacked a war party of Indians. 

July 13th, near Canada Alamosa, New Mexico, a detachment of Troop 
"C", 8th Cavalry, commanded by Captain C. W. Chilson, from Fort 
McRae, New Mexico, had a fight with a band of Indians, one soldier 
being wounded and three Indians killed; twelve horses and one mule 
stolen by the Indians were recaptured. 

So bold and frequent had been the Indian attacks upon the military 
posts and the escorts to working parties on the railroads, in the Depart 
ment of Dakota, that an additional regiment of cavalry, the 7th, was 
transferred to that Department from the Military Division of the South, 
for the purpose of following and punishing these Indians if they con 
tinued their attacks. An expedition was organized under Colonel D. S. 
Stanley, 22nd Infantry, and a supply depot established near Glendive 
Creek where it empties into the Yellowstone, the point at which it was 
expected the surveying parties of the Northern Pacific Railway would 
run their line across the river. The troops comprising the " Yellowstone 
Expedition" left Forts Rice and A. Lincoln, about the middle of June, 
returning to their stations in September after accomplishing the purposes 
intended, having had several engagements with the hostiles during this 
period. 

August 4th, Troops "A", and "B", 7th Cavalry, in advance, com 
manded by Captain M. Moylan, had a fight with Indians near Tongue 
River, Dakota, one soldier being reported missing in action and doubtless 
killed. Later in the same day the main column of the 7th Cavalry, com 
manded by Lieutenant Colonel G. A. Custer, were attacked by several 
hundred Sioux on the Yellowstone River, Montana; four enlisted men 
were reported killed and Lieutenant C. Braden, 7th Cavalry, and three 
enlisted men wounded. 

August llth, the column of ten troops, 7th Cavalry, commanded by 
Lieutenant Colonel G. A. Custer, were again attacked by a large body of 
Sioux, on the Yellowstone River, Montana; four Indians were reported 
killed and twelve wounded. 

August 31st, near Pease River, Texas, Troops "E", and "I", 10th 
Cavalry, Captain T. A. Baldwin, were attacked by a war party of Indians; 
one Indian was wounded. 

September 30th, the same troops under Captain Baldwin attacked a 
band of hostiles at Mesquit Flats, Texas, recapturing nine stolen horses. 

September 18th, Troops "K", and "E", 3rd Cavalry, Captain J. Egan 
commanding, attacked a war party of Sioux Indians on the north Laramie 
River, capturing eighteen horses and mules. 

September —, Troop "H", 8th Cavalry, Lieutenant H. J. Farnsworth, 
had a fight with Indians at Sierra San Mateo, New Mexico, killing two 
Indians. 

October 1st, in the Guadaloupe Mountains, New Mexico, Troop "C", 
8th Cavalry, Captain G. W. Chilson, had a fight with Indians, killing 
three of them and wounding one. The same day, at Central Station, 
Texas, Sergeant Mew, with a detachment of Company "K", 25th Infantry,
had a fight with Indians. At Camp Colorado, Texas, a detachment
consisting of a Sergeant and thirteen men were attacked by a party of 
Comanches, one Indian being wounded. 

October 25th, Lieutenant J. B. Kerr and twenty-five men of the 6th 
Cavalry attacked and captured a party of eight cattle thieves near Little 
Cabin Creek, Texas. Seventy horses and two hundred head of cattle 
stolen by the thieves were recaptured by the detachment. 

December 5th, Lieutenant E. S. Turner with a detachment of the 10th 
Cavalry assisting a Sheriff, overtook a band of twenty cattle thieves on 
Elm Creek, Texas, killed four of the thieves, captured sixteen of them 
and recovered about one thousand head of stolen cattle. 

December 9th, Troop "B", 4th Cavalry, Lieutenant C. S. Hudson, 
had a fight with Indians on the west Fork of the Nueces River, Texas. 

December 10th. near Kickapoo Springs, Texas, a detachment of forty- 
one men of the 4th Cavalry and nine Seminole scouts, commanded by 
Lieutenant C. L. Hudson, attacked a war party of Indians killing nine, 
wounding several and recapturing eighty-one stolen horses; one soldier 
was wounded. 

December 27th, Corporal Wright, with a detachment of the 25th 
Infantry, had a fight with Indians on Deep Red Creek, Indian Territory; 
one Indian was wounded. 

December 31st, a detachment of a Sergeant and three privates,
Company "B", 25th Infantry, were attacked by about fifteen Indians at 
Eagle Springs, Texas; one Indian was wounded.