1868. 
In the Department of the Missouri, in the spring of 1868, only a very 
few minor engagements with Indians were reported, previous to the gen 
eral outbreak which occurred in the summer of that year; they were 
chiefly in the District of New Mexico and occurred as follows: 

On March llth, Apache Indians raided the settlements in the neigh 
borhood of Tulerosa, New Mexico, killing and mutilating eleven men 
and two women, capturing one child, running oif a large 'number of 
sheep, about 2,200, and other stock. These marauders were pursued by 
a detachment of Troop "H", 3rd Cavalry, under command of 1st Lieut. 
P. D. Vroom, 3rd Cavalry, but having the advantage of three days start, 
the Indians escaped into the Guadaloupe Mountains, abandoning some of 
the sheep which were recovered. 

March 25th, the settlers upon Bluff Creek, Kansas, were attacked by 
Indians and driven from their houses, no details of this raid being offi 
cially reported. 

April 17th, at Nesmith's Mills, New Mexico, a detachment of Troop 
"H", 3rd Cavalry, commanded by Sergeant Glass, had a fight with 
Indians, the troops having one man wounded. Ten Indians were reported 
killed and twentv-five wounded. 

June 6th, Captain D. Monahan, 3rd Cavalry, in command of detach 
ments of Troops " G", and " I", 3rd Cavalry, started from Fort Sumner, 
New Mexico, in pursuit of a band of Navajoe Indians who had murdered 
four citizens, within twelve miles of that post. He followed their trail 
for a hundred miles, finally surprising them in a ravine, where he killed 
three Indians and wounded eleven, the balance escaping. The troops 
sustained no losses. 

June 25th, near Fort Hays, Kansas, a detachment of troops attacked 
and pursued a band of hostile Indians, but no casualties occurred. 

THE OUTBREAK OF 1868. 

Early in August a body of about 225 Cheyennes, Arapahoes and Sioux 
appeared among the advanced settlements on the Saline River, north of 
Fort Barker, Kansas. On August 10th, after being hospitably fed by 
the farmers, the Indians attacked them, robbed their houses and brutally 
outraged four females until insensible. Six houses were attacked, plun 
dered and burned. 

On the same day, August 10th, near the Cimmaron River, Kansas, 
two separate attacks were made by Indians upon the advance and rear 
guards of a column of troops commanded by Lieut. Colonel Alfred Sully, 
3rd Infantry. The attack upon the advance guard was repulsed by a 
charge, in which two Indians were killed, without casualty to the troops. 
In the attack upon the rear guard, who made a successful defence, one 
soldier was killed. Ten Indians were reported killed and twelve 
wounded. 

August 12th, Indians attempted to stampede the stock by a dash into 
the camp of the column under General Sully, but were frustrated in their 
designs. Later they attacked his main body, in large force, but were 
repulsed after a severe fight, lasting several hours, in which two soldiers 
were killed and three wounded. Twelve Indians were reported killed 
and fifteen wounded. 

August 12th, the Indians who had raided the settlements on the 
Saline, on August 10th, devastated those on the Solomon River, Kansas, 
where, though kindly received and fed by the people, they plundered and 
burned five houses, stole ten head of stock cattle, murdered fifteen per 
sons, wounded two and outraged five women. Two of these unfortunate 
women were also shot and badly wounded. A small band crossed to the 
Republican River and killed two persons there, but the main body 
returned to che Saline, with two captive children, named Bell. Here 
they again attacked the settlers, with the evident intention of clearing 
out the entire valley; but, whilst a Mr. Schermerhorn was defending his 
house, Captain Benteen, with his troop of the 7th Cavalry, arrived by a 
swift march from Fort Zarah, went to the relief of the house and ran the 
Indians about ten miles. Two women who had been ravished and cap 
tured by the Indians were rescued. The same day Major Douglass, com 
manding at Fort Dodge, Kansas, reported that a band of Cheyennes had 
robbed the camp of R. M. Wright of two horses and some arms, and 
that 132 horses and mules had been run off from a Mexican train at Paw 
nee Fork above Cimmaron Crossing. 

August 13th, General Sully's command, in Southern Kansas, was 
again attacked, one soldier was killed and four wounded. The troops 
routed the Indians, of whom ten were reported killed and twelve 
wounded. 

August 14th, at Granny Creek, on the Republican, a house was plun 
dered and burned, one person killed, one wounded and one woman out 
raged and captured. The same day near Fort Zarah, Kansas, Indians 
ran off twenty mules, which were recaptured by the troops. One man 
was wounded, one Indian reported killed and five wounded. 

August 18th, Indians attacked a train on Pawnee Fork, Kansas, and 
kept it corralled for two days, but were unable to capture it. Cavalry 
from Fort Dodge arrived and dispersed the Indians who returned to the 
attack the same night, but were again repulsed. Five men were 
wounded; the Indian loss, estimated, was five killed and ten wounded. 

August 19th, a party of wood choppers on Twin Butte Creek, were 
attacked by about thirty Indians, three killed and nine cut off, as reported 
by Lieut. G. Lewis, 5th Infantry, on August 23rd. All the animals (25) 
were driven off, and Mr. Jones, the contractor, chased, though making 
his escape by abandoning his horse and concealing himself amongst some 
trees in a ravine. 

August 22nd, Indians ran off twelve head of stock from the town of 
Sheridan, Kansas. 

August 23rd, the stage to Cheyenne Wells had to return, being chased 
by thirty Indians, four miles. The same day Captain Bankhead, 5th 
Infantry, commanding Fort Wallace, Kansas, reported the Denver stage 
coach attacked by Indians, between Pond Creek and Lake Station; also 
that Comstock's ranch was attacked on the night of August 20th; two 
men were killed and the others living there driven into Pond Creek, one 
man being mortally wounded and dying at Fort Wallace on the night of 
August 21st. In northern Texas, eight persons were killed and three 
hundred head of stock cattle captured. At Bent's Fort, on the Arkansas, 
fifteen horses and mules and four head of cattle were also run off. 

August 24th, in the vicinity of Bent's Fort, three stage coaches and 
one wagon train were attacked. 

August 25th, Indians killed a herder, near Fort Dodge, Kansas, and 
Acting Governor Hall, of Colorado, reported a band of two hundred 
Indians devastating southern Colorado. 

August 27th, Captain Bankhead, 5th Infantry, commanding Fort 
Wallace, reported that a band of thirteen Indians killed a citizen, named 
Woodworth, between Fort Lyon and the town of Sheridan; another 
citizen, named Wm. McCarty, was killed on the 23rd, near Lake Station, 
Colorado. Thirty Indians attacked the stage near Cheyenne Wells and 
would have captured it, but for the stout resistance of the escort. A 
body of about two hundred and fifty Indians also threatened the train of 
Captain Butler, 5th Infantry, causing him to return to Big Springs. 
Acting Governor Hall, of Colorado, again telegraphed that Arapahoes 
were killing settlers and destroying ranches in all directions. Lieut. F. 
H. Beecher, 3rd Infantry, reported two experienced government scouts, 
named Comstock and Grover, attacked by Indians professing friendship. 
Both were shot in the back, Comstock instantly killed; but, by lying on 
the ground and making a defence of Comstock's body, Grover kept off 
the Indians till night and made his escape. 

August 28th, near Kiowa Station, Indians killed three men and drove 
off fifty head of stock. Mr. Stickney, the station keeper, whilst with one 
man, in a wagon, was attacked and wounded. The Sergeant at Lake 

Station reported two employes driven in there and the station keeper and 
stock tender at Reed's Spring, driven off. 

August 29th, Captain Penrose, 3rd Infantry, commanding Fort Lyon, 
reported a train of thirteen wagons attacked by Indians, eighteen miles 
from the Arkansas River, the oxen killed, and the train destroyed; the 
men in charge, twenty-one in number, escaping in the night, to Fort 
Lyon. 

August 31st, Lieut. Riley, 5th Infantry, reported Indians had run off 
two hundred horses and forty cattle, from the stage company's station at 
Kiowa Creek. 

September 1st, near Lake Station, J. H. Jones, stage agent, reported 
a woman and a child killed and scalped, and thirty head of stock run off 
by Indians; at Reed's Springs, three persons were killed and three 
wounded; at Spanish Fort, Texas, four persons were murdered, eight 
scalped, fifteen horses and mules run off and three women outraged; one 
of these three women was outraged by thirteen Indians who afterwards 
killed and scalped her and then killed her four little children. 

September 3rd, on Little Coon Creek, Kansas, a wagon, guarded by 
four soldiers, commanded by Sergeant Dixon, Company "A", 3rd Infantry, 
were attacked by about forty Indians. Three of the men were badly 
wounded; three Indians were killed and one wounded. One of the men 
bravely volunteered to go to Fort Dodge, for help, which eventually 
arrived, under command of Lieut. Wallace, 3rd Infantry. 

September 4th, Major Tilford, 7th Cavalry, commanding Fort Rey 
nolds, Colorado, reported four persons killed, the day before, near Colo 
rado City. A large body of Indians also attacked the station at Hugo 
Springs, but were repulsed by the guards. 

September 5th, Indians drove off five head of stock from Hugo Springs 
and then went off and burned Willow Springs station. 

September 6th and 7th, twenty-five persons were killed in Colorado, 
and on the 7th, Hon. Schuyler Colfax telegraphed: " Hostile Indians have 
been striking simultaneously at isolated settlements in Colorado, for a 
circuit of over two hundred miles." . 

September 8th, Captain Bankhead, 5th Infantry, commanding Fort 
Wallace, reported about twenty-five Indians had killed and scalped two 
citizens near Sheridan and also drove off seventy-six horses and mules, 
from Clark's train on Turkey Creek. 

Lieut. Wallingford, 7th Cavalry, was sent to assist a wood train of 
thirty-five wagons and fifty men, attacked at Cimmaron crossing, who 
had been fighting four days. They had two men and two horses killed, 
seventy-five head of cattle run off and many mules wounded. Five miles 
further west, the remains of another train of ten wagons captured and 
burned, were found; fifteen men with this train were burned to death by 
the Indians. 

September 9th, between Fort Wallace and Sheridan, Kansas, Indians 
burned a ranch and killed six persons. The same ranch was also burned 
two weeks before and had been rebuilt. 

September 10th, Indians raided settlements on Purgatoire River. 
Troops from Fort Lyon, under Captain Penrose, 3rd Infantry, pursued 
rapidly, overtook the Indians on Rule Creek, Colorado, and killed four, 
recovering twelve head of stolen stock. Two soldiers were killed and 
one wounded, and five horses died from exhaustion in the chase. The 
same day Captain Butler, 5th Infantry, Fort Wallace, reported the stage 
fired into by Indians, four miles east of Lake Station. 

September llth, eighty-one head of stock cattle, belonging to Clarke 
and Co., hay contractors, were run off from Lake Creek. 

September 12th, General Nichols, traveling to Fort Reynolds, was 
attacked by Indians who were driven off by the guard. They then ran 
off eighty-five head of stock belonging to Thompson and McGee, near 
Bent's old fort, and made a raid on a house at Point of Rocks, running 
off four head of stock there. 

Between September llth and 15th, the column commanded by Lieut. 
Colonel Alfred Sully, 3rd Infantry, consisting of Troops "A", "B", "C", 
"D", "E", "F", "G", "I", and "K", 7th Cavalry, and Company "F", 
3rd Infantry, had a series of fights with Indians. Three soldiers were 
killed and five wounded. The total Indian loss was reported as twenty- 
two killed and twelve wounded. 

September 15th, on Big Sandy Creek, Colorado, Troop "I", 10th 
Cavalry, commanded by Captain Graham, were attacked by about one 
hundred Indians, and seven soldiers were wounded. Eleven Indians 
were reported killed and fourteen wounded. 

September 17th, Ellis Station, Kansas, was burned and one man 
killed. The settlements on Saline River, Kansas, were again raided by 
Indians, who were attacked, driven off and pursued by a detachment of 
7th Cavalry, three soldiers being wounded; the Indian loss, estimated, 
was three killed and five wounded. Three miles from Fort Bascom, New 
Mexico, Indians also killed a herder and ran off thirty mules; troops from 
the post pursued the Indians for one hundred and twenty-five miles, but 
could not overtake them. 

Brevet Colonel G. A. Forsyth, with his company of fifty scouts, took 
the trail of a party of Indians who had committed depredations near 
Sheridan City, and followed it to the Arickaree Fork of the Republican 
River, where he was attacked, on the 17th of September, by about seven 
hundred Indians, and after a very gallant fight repulsed the savages, 
inflicting a loss on them of thirty-five killed and many wounded. In the 
engagement Lieutenant F. H. Beecher and Surgeon Moore were killed, 
Forsyth twice wounded, and four of his scouts killed and fifteen wounded, 
the commanded existing on horseflesh, only, for a period of eight days. 

The gallantry displayed by this brave little command is worthy of the 
highest commendation, but it was only in keeping with the character of 
the two gallant officers in command of it, Brevet Colonel G. A. Forsyth, 
and Lieutenant Frederick H. Beecher. While the command was belea 
guered, two scouts stole through the Indian lines and brought word to 
Fort Wallace of its perilous situation. Brevet Colonel H. C. Bankhead, 
Captain 5th Infantry, commanding Fort Wallace, with the most com 
mendable energy started to its relief with one hundred men from that 
point, and Brevet Lieut. Colonel Carpenter's company of the 10th Cav 
alry, reaching Forsyth on the morning of the 25th of September. Upon 
receipt by telegraph and couriers, of the news of Eorsyth's desperate sit 
uation, a column of troops under General Bradley, from the Department 
of the Platte, then in the field, in the vicinity of the Republican River, 
also pushed hard for the scene of his fight, to lend assistance, arriving 
almost simultaneously with the relief column of Colonel Bankhead, from 
Fort Wallace, Kansas. 

September 19th, Captain Bankhead, 5th Infantry, Fort Wallace, 
reported a body of fifteen Indians had fired into the Mexican ranch, four 
miles east of Big Timber, Kansas. 

September 29th, on Sharp's Creek, Indians attacked a house, captur 
ing Mr. Bassett, his wife and child. They burned the house, killed Mr. 
Bassett, and after carrying off Mrs. Bassett, with her baby only two days 
old, finding her too weak to travel, they outraged her, stripped her naked 
and left her with her infant to perish on the prairie. 

October 2nd, General Hazen reported an attack on Fort Zarah by 
about one hundred Indians who were, however, driven off. They then 
attacked a provision train, killed a teamster and stole the mules from 
four teams, after which they attacked a ranch, eight miles distant, and 
drove off one hundred and sixty head of stock. General Sully also 
reported an attack by Indians on a train between Fort Larned and Fort 
Dodge; three citizens were killed, three wounded and over fifty mules 
run off. 

October 4th, Major Douglass reported that Indians had wounded a 
Mexican at Lime-Kiln; also that they had attacked a train on the road, 
killed two men, wounded two, destroyed stores and ran off stock, whilst 
also, at Asher Creek settlement, Indians ran off seven head of horses and 
mules. 

October 10th, eight horses and mules were run off from Fort Zarah, 
as reported by Lieut. Kaiser, 3rd Infantry. 

October llth, Captain Penrose, 3rd Infantry, reported three hundred 
Indians on the Purgatoire, on October 7th, and that they had killed a 
Mexican and run off thirty-eight head of stock. 

October 12th, Lieutenant Belger, 3rd Infantry, reported a party of 
Indians near Ellsworth, Kansas, where they killed one man arid several 
were missing. 

October 13th, a house at Brown's Creek was attacked. 

October 14th, Indians attacked camp of 5th Cavalry on Prairie Dog 
Creek, Kansas. Of Troop "L", 5th Cavalry, one man was killed and 
one wounded. The Indians also ran off twenty-six cavalry horses. On 
the same day Captain Penrose, 3rd Infantry, reported that Indians had 
attacked a train on Sand Creek, Colorado. Led by " Satanta", chief of 
the Kiowas, they ran off the cattle and captured a Mrs. Blinn and her 
child. These prisoners were afterwards cruelly murdered by the Indians, 
in General Custer's attack on "Black Kettle's" camp, November 27th. 

October loth, on Fisher and Yocucy Creeks, a house was attacked, 
four persons killed, one wounded, arid one woman captured. 

October 18th, on Beaver Creek, Kansas, Troops "H", "I", and "M", 
10th Cavalry, Captain L. H. Carpenter, commanding, had a fight with a 
large body of Indians, in which- three soldiers were wounded and ten 
Indians killed. 

October 23rd, at Fort Zarah two persons were killed by Indians who 
sustained a loss of two killed. 

October 25th and 26th, a column consisting of Troops "A", "B", "F", 
"H", "I", "L", and "M", 5th Cavalry, and a company of scouts, under 
Major E. A. Carr, 5th Cavalry, had a fight with a large body of Indians 
on Beaver Creek, Kansas. One soldier was wounded; the Indians had 
thirty killed, a number wounded, and lost, also, about one hundred and 
thirty ponies, mostly killed, besides a large amount of camp equipage. 

October 26th, near Central City, New Mexico, three citizens were 
killed by Indians. 

October 30th, in an attack on Grinnell Station, Kansas, one Indian 
was wounded. 

November 7th, on Coon Creek, Kansas, the stage was attacked and a 
horse captured by Indians. 

November 15th, a squadron of the 7th Cavalry struck a party of 
Indians one hundred and forty miles from Fort Harker and pursued them 
for ten miles; Indian loss, estimated, was five wounded. 

November 17th, Indians attacked a train seven miles from Fort Har 
ker and ran ofi" about one hundred arid fifty mules. 

November 18th, Indians killed two government scouts, seven miles 
from Fort Hays, Kansas, and captured their horses. 

November 19th, on Little Coon Creek, Kansas, one person was mur 
dered and five Indians killed. The same day near Fort Dodge, one 
white person and two Indians were killed. In the same vicinity a 
detachment of Troop "A", 10th Cavalry, under Sergeant Wilson, had a 
fight in which two Indians were killed. Indians also attempted to stam 
pede the beef contractor's herd, half a mile from Fort Dodge, Kansas; 
Lieutenant Q. Campbell, 5th Infantry, with companies "A", and " H", 3rd 
Infantry, and a detachment of 5th Infantry, pursued the Indians for seven 
miles, killing four and wounding six of them. The troops had three men 
wounded. 

November 20th, on Mulberry Creek, south of Fort Dodge, two govern 
ment scouts named Marshall and Davis, were killed by Indians. 

November 25th, in the Indian Territory, twenty horses and mules 
were stolen and two Indians killed. 

In addition to the foregoing murders and outrages, the following were 
reported by Acting Indian Agent, S. T. Walkley, and P. McCusker, 
U. S. Interpreter; all occurring in northern Texas. January, 1868, 
twenty-five persons were killed, nine scalped and fourteen children captured;
the latter were afterwards frozen to death whilst in captivity. In 
February, seven were killed, fifty horses and mules stolen and five chil 
dren captured; two of the latter were surrendered to Colonel Leaven- 
worth, and the remaining three taken to Kansas. In May, three houses 
were attacked, plundered and burned. In June, one person was killed 
and three children belonging to Mr. McElroy, captured; while in July, 
on the Brazos River, Texas, four persons were killed. In nearly all these 
instances, the most savage and horrible barbarities were perpetrated upon 
the unfortunate victims of the Indians. 

So boldly had this system of murder and robbery been carried on, 
that, since June, 1862, not less than eight hundred persons had been 
murdered, the Indians escaping from the troops, by traveling at night, 
when their trail could not be followed, thus gaining enough time and dis 
tance to render pursuit, in most cases, fruitless. This wholesale maraud 
ing would be maintained during the seasons when the Indian ponies 
could subsist upon the grass, and then, in the winter, the savages would 
hide away, with their villages, in remote and isolated places, to live upon 
their plunder, glory in the scalps taken and in the horrible debasement 
of the unfortunate women whom they held as prisoners. The experience 
of many years of this character of depredations, with perfect immunity to 
themselves and families, had made the Indians very bold. To disabuse 
their minds of the idea that they were secure from punishment, and to 
strike them at a period when they were helpless to move their stock and 
villages, a winter campaign was projected against the large bands hiding 
away in the Indian Territory. 

General Getty, commanding the District of New Mexico, was directed 
to send out a column from Fort Bascom, New Mexico; this was com 
manded by Brevet Lieut. Colonel A. W. Evans, 3rd Cavalry. Another 
was started out from Fort Lyon, Colorado, under General E. A. Carr;
whilst a third, and the largest, consisting of eleven troops of the 7th 
Cavalry, under General Ouster, and twelve companies of Kansas volun 
teer cavalry, together with several companies of the 3rd and 5th Infantry, 
was organized, at Fort Dodge, Kansas, under command of General Sully. 
The last named expedition established " Camp Supply" in the Indian 
Territory, whither the Department Commander, General Sheridan, pro 
ceeded in person to supervise operations during this experimental cam 
paign. 

General Sheridan personally accompanied the main column from 
Camp Supply to Fort Cobb, directing all of its operations as well as those 
of the columns from Fort Lyon, under General Carr, and from Fort Bas- 
com, under Colonel Evans, until the final surrender of the Indians and 
the close of the winter's campaign. 

The objects of the winter's operations were to strike the Indians a 
hard blow and force them on to the reservations set apart for them; or, 
if this could not be accomplished, to show to the Indian that the winter 
season would not give him rest; that he with his villages and stock, could 
be destroyed; that he would have no security, winter or summer, except 
in obeying the laws of peace and humanity. 

The plan of operations to accomplish these purposes, was to allow the 
small column from Fort Bascom, consisting of six troops of cavajfry, 
two companies of infantry, and four mountain howitzers, aggregating 
five hundred and sixty-three men, operate along the main Canadian, 
establishing a depot at Monument Creek, and remaining out as long as it 
could be supplied, at least until sometime in January; the column of 
General Carr, seven troops of the Fifth Cavalry, to unite with a force 
under Captain Penrose, then out, composed of one troop of the 7th and 
four of the 10th Cavalry, establish a depot on the headwaters of the 
North Canadian, and operate south towards the Antelope Hills and head 
waters of Red River. These columns were really beaters in and were 
not expected to accomplish much. The main column from "Camp Supply"
was expected to strike the Indians, either on the headwaters of the 
Washita, or still further south on the branches of Red River. 

November 26th, General Custer struck the trail of a war party, com 
posed of "Black Kettle's" band of Cheyennes, with other Cheyennes and 
Arapahoes. They had been north, had killed the mail carriers between 
Dodge and Larned, also an old hunter at Dodge, and two expressmen 
sent back, by General Sheridan with letters. As soon as Custer struck 
the trail he corraled his wagons, left a small escort with them and fol 
lowed the Indian trail, which was very fresh and well marked in the deep 
snow, until it led into Black Kettle's village on the Washita. The next 
morning, before daylight, the Usage Indian trailers discovered the village 
of the Indians, and notified Custer, who at once made the most admirable 
dispositions for its attack and capture. At dawn a charge was made, the
village captured and burned, eight hundred horses or ponies shot, in 
accordance with positive orders, one hundred and three warriors killed, 
and fifty-three squaws and children captured. 

Whilst this work was going on, all the Indians for a distance of fifteen 
miles, down the Washita, collected and attacked Ouster; these Indians 
were Cheyennes, Comanches, Kiowas and Apaches; they were driven 
down the stream for a distance of four or five miles, when, as ni<yht was 
approaching, Custer withdrew and returned to a small train of provisions 
which he had directed to follow up his movements. Our loss, in the 
attack at the village, was Captain Louis M. Hamilton and three men 
killed, with three officers and eleven men wounded. Unfortunately, 
Major Elliott, of the 7th Cavalry, a very gallant and promising young 
officer, seeing some of the young boys escape, followed, with the Ser 
geant Major and fifteen men to capture and bring them in; after secur 
ing them and while on their way back to the regiment, Elliott's party 
were surrounded and killed. It occurred in this way: Elliott followed 
the boys, shortly after the attack on the viilage, taking a course due 
south, and nearly at right angles to the Washita River. After traveling 
south a mile and a half from the village, a very small branch of the Wash 
ita was crossed and an open prairie reached; on this prairie the boys were 
captured and were being brought back, when the party was attacked by 
Indians from below, numbering from one thousand to fifteen hundred. 
Elliott fought his way back towards the small creek before named, until 
within rifle range of the creek, when he was stopped by Indians who had 
taken position in the bed of the creek and picked off his men who 
formed a little circle, around which their dead and horribly mutilated 
bodies were found. No one of those back with the regiment knew of 
Elliott's party having followed the Indian boys; no one heard the report 
of their guns and no one knew of their exact fate until they were discov 
ered afterwards, savagely mutilated almost beyond recognition. 

General Custer, after destroying the village and driving the Indians 
some four or five miles down the Washita, returned, as before mentioned, 
to the train of supplies which he had directed to follow him and next day 
started back to Camp Supply with his prisoners, where he arrived on the 
1st of December. 

The blow that Custer had struck was a hard one, and fell on the 
guiltiest of all the bands, that of Black Kettle. It was this band, with 
others, that, without provocation, had massacred the settlers on the 
Saline and Solomon, and perpetrated cruelties too fiendish for recital. 

In his camp were found numerous articles recognized as the property 
of the unfortunate victims of the butcheries before described; also a 
blank book with Indian illustrations of the various deviltries they had 
perpetrated. They had spared neither age nor sex; in all instances ravishing
the women, sometimes forty or fifty times, and whilst insensible
from brutality and exhaustion, forced sticks up their persons. On one 
occasion a savage drew a sabre and used it in the same barbarous manner
upon the person of the wretched woman who had fallen into his hands. 

With the capture and destruction of Black Kettle's village, the work 
of the expedition was not complete. Although the weather was bitter 
cold, the thermometer 18° below zero, with blinding snow storms raging, 
the column pressed on, digging and bridging ravines for the passage of 
the train. This was continued until the evening of December 16th, when 
the vicinity of the Indians was again reached. They were mostly Kiowas 
and did not dream that soldiers could operate against them in such awful 
weather. Completely taken by surprise, they agreed that all the warriors 
should join the column and march with it to Fort Cobb, while their vil 
lages moved to the same point. This was only a decoy, however, to save 
themselves from attack; for all slipped off, excepting the head chiefs 
Satan ta and Lone Wolf, whom Ouster had been ordered to arrest. When 
the column reached Fort Oobb, it was found that the villages, instead of 
moving there, were already nearly a hundred miles distant, hurrying in 
the opposite direction. Orders were immediately issued for the execu 
tion of the chiefs Satanta and Lone Wolf, unless the villages should 
deliver themselves up at Fort Cobb, in two days. All came back even 
tually, under this pressure, and the lives of their chiefs were saved. At 
Fort Cobb were found most of the Comanches and Apaches, who had 
hastened in to the reservation, there, after the fight with Custer, on the 
Washita, November 27th. 

While these operations were going on, Brevet Lieutenant Colonel A. 
W. Evans moved from Fort Bascom up the main Canadian, to Monument 
Creek, there established his depot, and with the most commendable 
energy, struck off south, on to the headwaters of Red River, discovered a 
trail of hostile Comanches who had refused to come in, followed it up 
with perseverance, and on the 25th of December, attacked the party, 
killed, as nearly as could be ascertained, 'twenty-five, wounded a large 
number, captured and burned their village, destroyed a large amount of 
property and then moved to a point about twelve miles west of Fort 
Cobb. 

Meanwhile, General Carr was scouting along the main Canadian, west 
of the Antelope Hills, and the country was becoming so unhealthy for 
Indians, that the Arapahoes and the remainder of the Cheyennes con 
cluded to surrender and go upon the reservation selected for them. The 
operations of the troops had forced these Indians over into the eastern 
edge of the Staked Plains, where there was no game, and the limited 
amount of supplies which they had been able to put up for the winter, 
had been mostly lost in the engagement on the Washita and in their sub 
sequent flight. 

The surrender was made by "Little Robe", with other representative 
chiefs, for the Cheyennes, by "Little Raven " and "Yellow Bear", for 
the Arapahoes, by "Lone Wolf and "Satanta", for the Kiowas, and by 
"Esse-Ha-Habit", for the Comanches; they agreed to deliver up their 
people at Fort Cobb, as speedily as possible, claiming that it would take 
some time to get in, on account of the exhausted condition of their stock. 

The Arapahoes were faithful to their agreement and delivered them 
selves up under their head chief, "Little Raven." The Cheyennes broke 
their promise and did not come in, so General Ouster was ordered against 
them, and came upon them on the headwaters of Red River, apparently 
moving north; it is possible they were on their way to Camp Supply, as 
they had been informed that, if they did not get into the Fort Cobb 
reservation within a certain time, they would not be received there, but 
would be received at Camp Supply. 

Custer found them in a very forlorn condition, and could have 
destroyed most of the tribe, certainly their villages, but contented him 
self with taking their renewed promise to come into Camp Supply, and 
obtained from them two white women whom they held as captives. The 
most of the tribe fulfilled this latter promise so far as coming into the 
vicinity of Camp Supply and communicating with the commanding offi 
cer; but "Tall Bulls" band again violated the promise made and went 
north to the Republican, where they joined a party of Sioux, who, on the 
13th of May, 1869, were attacked by General Carr and defeated with 
heavy loss; whereupon, the whole tribe moved into Camp Supply. 

Whilst the Arapahoes and Cheyennes were negotiating for surrender, 
the Quehada, or Staked Plains Comanches, sent a delegation to Fort Bas- 
com, offering to surrender themselves, expecting, perhaps, to obtain bet 
ter terms there than had been offered them already; but General Getty 
arrested the delegation which was ordered to Fort Leavenworth and 
finally returned to their people, upon condition that they would all 
deliver themselves up on the reservation at Medicine Bluff or at Fort 
Sill. This they complied wii?h and so were fulfilled all the objects had in 
view at the commencement of the winter's campaign, viz.; punishment 
inflicted, property destroyed, the Indians convinced that winter would no 
longer bring them security, and most of the tribes south of the Platte 
forced upon the reservations set apart for them by the government. 

In all, from March 2nd, 1868, to February 9th, 1869, there were offici 
ally reported in the Department of the Missouri, three hundred and fifty- 
three officers, soldiers and citizens, killed, wounded, or captured by 
Indians. Of the Indians there were reported, officially, three hundred 
and nineteen killed, two hundred and eighty-nine wounded and fifty- 
three captured. The numbers of the Indians who surrendered at the 
various points mentioned, were not officially ascertained, with accuracy, 
but they amounted to about twelve thousand. 