1879.
The Northern Cheyennes held in confinement at Fort Robinson, were 
informed that the Indian Department had directed their return to the 
country from which they had escaped; only a few of the prisoners, how 
ever, expressed a willingness to go, and upon attempting to remove 
their effects from the prison room, were forcibly detained there by the 
other Indians who, fearing punishment for the crimes which they had 
committed during their flight, were determined to die, rather than be 
taken back to the south, again. 

On January 9th it was decided to arrest " Wild Hog", the principal 
disturber, and he was securely ironed only after a very severe struggle, 
in which a soldier was stabbed. The Indians in the building used as a 
prison, immediately barricaded the doors and covered the windows, to 
conceal their movements, tearing up the floor and making rifle-pits to 
command all the entrances. Ai first it was supposed the Indians had 
only knives, but when captured they had also succeeded in concealing 
some pistols and carbines; armed with slings and other weapons, their 
prison room was described in an official report as "like a den of rattle 
snakes", into which it was certain death for any white man to enter. 

About ten o'clock on the night of January 10th, while six sentinels 
were on guard around the prison building, shots were fired from the 
windows, killing two of the sentinels and wounding a corporal in the 
guard room. Simultaneously a rush was made from all the windows, 
the Indians dashing out resolved to kill or be killed. The guard and 
the troops of the garrison gave chase, the Indians fleeing toward the 
creek near the post, and keeping up an incessant fire upon their pursuers. 
All refused to surrender, when called upon to do so, and in the various 
struggles which took place, altogether five soldiers were killed and seven 
wounded; thirty-two Indians were killed and seventy-one were recap 
tured. The pursuit of the remainder was continued, and on January 
llth, about twelve miles from the post, they were overtaken in a strongly 
intrenched position, where skirmishing was kept/up all day, the Indians 
appearing to have plenty of ammunition. On January 13th, Lieuten 
ant Simpson, of the 3rd Cavalry, attacked them and had one corporal 
killed; later in the day he struck them again near the Hat Creek road, 
where he had another enlisted man wounded. On January 14th the 
Indians were again attacked by the troops, in a strongly intrenched place, 
about twenty miles from Fort Robinson; shells were fired into their 
position, but no damage appeared to be done and during the night they 
again succeeded in making their escape. Of the fugitives only forty-five 
now remained unaccounted for by death or capture; of these nineteen 
were warriors, and all were evidently bent upon joining " Little Wolf's" 
band from which they had become separated whilst escaping from the 
Indian Territory. 

On January 18th, a lot of horses were taken from a ranch on the 
Sidney road, believed to be stolen by some of Little Wolfs band, and 
troops from Fort D. A. Russell were sent in pursuit. 

On January 20th, Major Evans with Troops "B" and "D", 3rd 
Cavalry, intercepted the Cheyennes who had left Fort Robinson, strongly 
posted upon some cliffs; they escaped, however, during the night, toward 
the Red Cloud Agency, but Captain Wessells, with Troops " A", " E", 
"F", and "H", 3rd Cavalry, overtook them again on January 22d, near 
the telegraph line from Fort Robinson to Hat Creek, where they were 
intrenched in a gully. They refused all terms of surrender, so Captain 
Wessells' force charged them and killed or captured the entire party : 
Captain Wessells and two men were wounded and three enlisted men 
were killed; twenty-three Cheyennes were killed and nine were cap 
tured, three of whom were wounded. The prisoners reported that "Dull 
Knife" had been killed by a shell, in the artillery attack upon their 
position a few days before. 

February 13th, "Victoria", with twenty-two Warm Spring Apache 
Indians who had made their escape when about being taken to the San 
Carlos Agency, Arizona, surrendered to Lieutenant Merritt, 9th Cavalry, 
at Ojo Caliente, New Mexico; after his escape, Victoria had been to 
old Mexico, and now desired to send to the Fort Stanton Indian reserva 
tion, where he believed there were other Indians belonging to his band. 
He was given a pass to send two of his Indians, and in a few days a total 
of thirty-nine Warm Spring Indians were gathered at Ojo Caliente. 
Learning, however, that the whole band were to be sent to the Stanton 
reservation, on April 15th they all broke away again from Ojo Caliente 
and escaped to the San Mateo Mountains, New Mexico. Two troops of 
the 9th Cavalry and one company of Indian scouts were sent in pursuit, 
followed Victoria into Arizona whence, joined by other Indians from the 
San Carlos Agency, they all succeeded in escaping into old Mexico. 

March 15th a Mexican herder was killed about fifty miles from Fort 
Ewell, Texas. 

March 25th, near Box Elder Creek, in the Department of Dakota, 
Lieutenant Clark, 2d Cavalry, with Troops " E " and " I", 2d Cavalry, a 
detachment of infantry, a field gun and some Indian scouts, overtook 
"Little Wolf" and his band of Northern Cheyennes who had escaped 
from Fort Reno, Indian Territory, the previous autumn, and had thus far 
eluded every attempt at capture. The Indians were persuaded to sur 
render without fighting and gave up thirty-five lodges, with all their 
arms and about two hundred and fifty ponies, and marched with the 
troops to Fort Keogh, Montana. The band numbered thirty-three men, 
forty-three squaws and thirty-eight children. 

For murdering two members of this band, a party of eight Indians 
had been driven out of Little Wolfs camp previously, and this small 
party, on the 5th of April, attacked a signal sergeant and a private soldier 
of the 2d Cavalry, on Mizpah Creek, killing the private, severely 
wounding the sergeant and capturing their horses. Sergeant Glover, 
Troop " B", 2d Cavalry, with ten men and three Indian scouts from 
Fort Keogh, pursued this small party and captured them all on April 
10th. 

March 1st, several head of stock were stolen by Indians from 
McDonald and Dillon's ranch near Powder River, Montana. March 4th, 
twenty-three head of stock were also stolen from Countryman's ranch, 
near the mouth of the Stillwater. March 28th, Indians attacked two white 
men, near the mouth of the Big Horn River, killed one, named H. D. 
Johnson, and wounded the other, named James Stearns; a man named 
Dave Henderson was also killed the same day, near Buffalo Station, on 
the Yellowstone. Horses were also run off from Pease's Bottom, near the 
mouth of Buffalo Creek, and sixty-seven ponies were stolen from the 
Crows* at their agency. The Indians committing these depredations 
were ascertained to be Sioux from the north, with a few Nez Percys; 
Captains Mix and Gregg with their troops of the 2d Cavalry were 
dispatched in pursuit, but after a very hard chase were unable to over 
take the marauders. 

April 4th, the commanding officer of Fort Ellis, Montana, reported 
that Indians had stolen twenty-five or thirty horses, the previous night, 
from Countryman's ranch on the Yellowstone, and that a party of citizens 
and some friendly Crow Indians had gone in pursuit. On April 5th, the 
same officer reported that Sioux and half-breed Nez Perces had raided 
the Crow Indians on the Stillwater. On April 6th, Indians also attacked 
the ranch of Sebezzo and Peterson, near Powder River, killed the 
former, wounded the latter and ran off eight or ten head of stock. 
The Indians were recognized as Gros Ventres, and came from the 
Northwest Territory. 

On April 10th, the commanding officer of Fort Ellis reported that 
Indians attempted to steal stock at Young's Point, but were discovered 
and driven off; on April 14th, seven horses were stolen by Indians on 
Pryor's Fork; on April 22d, the same officer reported that some Crow 
Indian scouts had overtaken a party of Sioux who had stolen horses from 
Countryman's ranch, and had killed one of the hostiles. 

Lieutenant L. H. Loder, 7th Infantry, with fourteen mounted men, of 
the 3rd and 7th Infantry, and six Indian scouts, pursued a party of Sioux 
who had been committing depredations, and on April 17th attacked them 
near Careless Creek, at the head of the Musselshell Canon, Montana, and 
killed eight of the hostiles; two of the scouts were killed and one 
wounded. 

May 3rd, Indians ran off twelve head of stock from the east side of the 
Little Big Horn : the commanding officer of Fort Ouster sent a detach 
ment of Crow scouts in pursuit, but the thieves could not be overtaken. 

May 1st, a Mexican teamster was killed between Fort Ewell and 
Corpus Christi, Texas. (Reported by commanding officer Fort Mclntosh, 
Texas.) 

May 18th, John Clarkson was murdered near Van Horn's Wells, 
Texas. (Reported by commanding officer Fort Davis, Texas.) 

May 29th, Captain Beyer with Troop "C", and a detachment of Troop 
"I", 9th Cavalry, attacked Victoria's Apaches in the Miembres Mount 
ains, New Mexico, captured the camp with all the animals, and wounded 
four Indians, two of them mortally : one enlisted man was killed and two 
wounded. The band fled into old Mexico, five of their number being 
killed near the San Francisco settlement, New Mexico. 

June 1st, the commanding officer of Fort Clark, Texas, reported that 
the wife and two daughters of N. Colson were killed by Indians, near 
Camp Wood, Texas. 

June 16th, a party of Texans pursued a band of Indians and recap 
tured nineteen horses which had been stolen near Fort McKavett, Texas. 

June 19th, a party of ten Sioux, with thirty stolen horses, crossed the 
Missouri River about eleven miles above Fort Benton, Montana; Lieuten 
ant Van Orsdale, 7th Infantry, with a detachment of eight men caught up 
with five of these Indians", killed one and drove the rest into the " Bad 
Lands." 

June 29th, Indians stole seven head of stock on the Little Big Horn, 
about seven miles from Fort Custer, Montana : some Crow scouts also 
had a fight with a band of Sioux near the head of Alkali Creek, about 
twenty-five miles from Terry's Landing, on the Yellowstone, killed four 
of the hostiles and captured thirty-three ponies : one Crow scout was 
killed and four wounded. 

June 30th, a man named Anglin was killed in a fight with Indians 
near the head waters of the North Concho River, Texas. (Reported by 
the commanding officer of Fort Concho, Texas.) 

July 14th, a Mexican woman, (name unknown,) was killed about four 
miles northeast of Fort Clark, Texas. (Reported by commanding officer 
of Fort Clark.) 

July 27th, Captain Courtney, 25th Infantry, with a detachment of ten 
men of Troop "H", 10th Cavalry, had a fight with Indians at the salt 
lakes near the Carrizo Mountains, Texas; three Indians were wounded, 
two of them mortally, and ten ponies were captured; two enlisted men 
were wounded. 

Many depredations having been recently committed by Indians in the 
vicinity of the Missouri and Yellowstone Rivers, it was ascertained that 
large numbers of hostiles, half-breeds and foreign Indians, from British 
Columbia, including the Indians under Sitting Bull, were roaming upon 
United States territory, south of the boundary line. From a number of 
reliable persons who had seen the main hostile camp, this was estimated 
at not less than five thousand Indians, of whom two thousand were 
warriors, with twelve thousand horses. Half-breed Indians had also been 
trading with the hostiles and furnishing them with ammunition, so in 
July Colonel Miles was sent from Fort Keogh, Montana, with a strong 
force to break up their camp, separate the doubtful Indians from those 
avowedly hostile, and force the foreign Indians to return north of the 
boundary. 

Colonel Miles' force consisted of seven companies 5th Infantry, seven 
troops 2d Cavalry, a detachment of artillery and some friendly Indian 
and white scouts. At Fort Peck he was joined by two companies of the 
6th Infantry, and his entire command then numbered thirty-three 
officers, six hundred and forty-three enlisted men and one hundred and 
forty-three Indian and white scouts. 

The hostiles consisted of the Uncapapas, under Sitting Bull, the Min- 
neconjous, under "Black Eagle", the Sans Arcs, under " Spotted Eagle", 
and the Ogallalas, under "Big Road " and " Broad Tail." 

Colonel Miles reported that the depredations of the hostiles hack 
resulted in the killing of not less than twenty men and the stealing of 
three hundred head of stock, all of which had been taken to the hostile 
camp. 

As a preliminary step the Yanktonnais camp of about three or four 
hundred lodges, were first moved to the south side of the Missouri, about 
June 23rd. 

On July 17th, the advance guard of Colonel Miles' column, consisting 
of a troop of the 2d Cavalry, a company of the 5th Infantry and about 
fifty Indian scouts, commanded by Lieutenant Clark, 2d Cavalry, had a 
sharp fight with from three to four hundred Indians, between Beaver and 
Frenchmen's Creeks; the Indians were pursued for twelve miles, when 
the advance became surrounded : Colonel Miles moved forward rapidly 
arid the hostiles fled north of Milk River. Several of the enemy were 
killed and a large amount of their property abandoned; two enlisted men 
and one Indian scout were wounded and three Indian scouts killed. 
Sitting Bull himself was present in this engagement. 

On July 31st, Colonel Miles reported that the main hostile camp had 
retreated north, across the boundary, to Wood Mountain; the column 
followed and halted on the main trail at the British line, whence it 
returned to Milk River. 

Attention was then turned to the camps of the half-breeds which had 
formed a cordon of out-posts around the main hostile camp, furnishing 
the latter with the supplies of war. On August 4th, Captain Ovenshine, 
5th Infantry, with a portion of Colonel Miles' command, arrested a band 
of half-breeds on Porcupine Creek, capturing one hundred and forty- 
three carts and one hundred and ninety-three horses. On August 5th, 
four camps of half-breeds were arrested, numbering three hundred and 
eight carts. On August 8th, Colonel Miles reported the total number of 
half-breeds arrested by various detachments, eight hundred and twenty- 
nine, with six hundred and sixty-five carts. 

On August 14th, Lieutenant Colonel Whistler, 5th Infantry, with 
part of Colonel Miles' command, captured a band of fifty-seven Indians 
with one hundred ponies, who had left the Rosebud Agency and were in 
the act of crossing the Missouri, near Poplar Creek, on their way to join 
Sitting Bull in the north. 

On August 28th it was officially reported that extensive fires were 
raging in the mountains west of Hot Sulphur Springs, Colorado, the work 
of Indian incendiaries. On September 10th, Mr. N. C. Meeker, agent 
for the White River Utes, wrote to the Governor of Colorado that 
Indians had fired upon an agency employe, whilst plowing, that his 
house had been attacked, himself driven out of doors and injured con 
siderably. Mr. Meeker stated that the lives of the people at the agency 
were in danger and that at least one hundred soldiers should be sent 
there to protect the people; he therefore requested the governor of 
Colorado to confer with General Pope, commanding the Department 
of the Missouri, and with Senator Teller of Colorado, with the object of 
obtaining the required aid. 

On September 16th, directions were given by the Honorable Secretary 
of War, in compliance with request from the Interior Department, for 
the nearest military commander to send a force to the White River 
Agency, to protect the agent and to arrest the ringleaders of the Indians 
who had committed the outrages reported. Accordingly General Crook, 
commanding the Department of the Platte, ordered Major T. T. Thorn- 
burgh, 4th Infantry, with Troops " D " and " F", 5th Cavalry, " E", 3rd 
Cavalry, and Company u E", 4th Infantry, to proceed to the White River 
Agency, Colorado. This force, numbering about two hundred officers 
and men, left Fort Fred Steele, Wyoming, September 21st, and reached 
Fortification Creek, Colorado, September 25th. The infantry company 
numbering about thirty men was left there, to establish a supply camp, 
and the cavalry proceed to Bear Creek, September 26th. During the 
afternoon of September 26th, several Ute Indians of prominence came 
into the cavalry camp, talked freely with Major Thornburgh, on the 
subject of the troops coming to the agency, and departed about night, 
apparently in good humor. At Williams Fork of Bear River, the next 
day, September 27th, an employe of the White River Agency, named 
Eskridge, accompanied by several prominent Ute Indians, arrived with 
a letter from the agent, Mr. Meeker, to Major Thornburgh, stating that 
the Indians at the agency were greatly excited and wished the advance 
of the troops stopped, though agreeing to a proposition that the com 
manding officer with five soldiers should come to the agency. Major 
Thornburgh replied that he would camp his command at some convenient 
place, the following day, and proceed on September 29th to the agency, 
with only five men and a guide, as suggested; but he also renewed a 
former request for Mr. Meeker with such chiefs as the latter might select, 
to come out and meet the command on the road. 

On September 29th, at one o'clock in the afternoon, Mr. Meeker 
accordingly wrote that he would leave the agency, with several chiefs, 
on the following morning, to meet Major Thornburgh. 

On September 28th the cavalry camped at Deer Creek, and on the 
29th reached Milk River, about ten o'clock in the morning. After 
watering the horses, Troop "D", 5th Cavalry, was left to continue the 
march along the road with the wagons, while Major Thornburgh, with 
the rest of the cavalry, turned off from the road, taking a trail which bore 
away to the left. After placing a mile between themselves and the 
wagons, the troops with Major Thornburgh, in crossing a high ridge 
commanding the main road along which the wagons were traveling, came 
suddenly upon the Indians in heavy force. 

The whole attitude of the Indians was hostile, so Major Thornburgh 
at once dismounted and deployed his men, but at the same time tried to 
open communication with the Indians. His overtures were, however, 
met by a volley and a hot engagement at once began. The Indians had 
not only the advantage of position but were superior in numbers to the 
troops in advance, so Major Thornburgh determined to withdraw and 
join the escort with the wagon train. The skirmish line retired slowly, 
leading their horses, but returning a fire which did great execution 
among the Indians. Failing to break the line of skirmishers, the Indians 
attempted to get between them and the wagon train, which had gone 
into park on the right bank of Milk River. The Indians took a strong 
position commanding Thornburgh's line of retreat, and a charge by about 
twenty men under Captain Payne was ordered, so as to clear a command 
ing knoll of Indians, reach the train and arrange for its protection. This 
was done and Major Thornburgh himself started for the train soon after 
giving this order, but he was shot and instantly killed, just after crossing 
the river and when within five hundred yards of the wagons. 

The line of skirmishers in front commanded by Captain Lawson, 3rd 
Cavalry, steadily fell back toward the wagons, their retreat skillfully 
covered by a detachment under Lieutenant Cherry of the 5th Cavalry. 
The wagons were formed into an elliptical corral, about two hundred 
yards from the river, the side toward the stream being exposed to a 
furious fire from the Indians who were making determined efforts to 
capture and destroy the train. The animals were crowded in the space 
formed by the wagons; about twenty or more which were wounded 
were led out upon the open side of the corral, toward the Indians and 
shot there, to form a slight defence for some of the men acting as sharp 
shooters; the wagons were unloaded and with their contents slight 
breastworks were hastily made, the Indians keeping up a most destruc 
tive fire under which officers and men rapidly fell. 

A high wind was blowing, at this time, and the Indians set fire to the 
tall grass and sage bush down the valley, the flames spreading rapidly 
toward the troops, igniting bundles, grain sacks, wagon covers and other 
combustibles, threatening the train with entire destruction. The Indians 
attacked the command furiously, at this critical moment, but the troops 
succeded in extinguishing the flames among the wagons, with considera 
ble loss to themselves in killed and wounded. The Indian supply train 
of Mr. John Gordon was parked, within seventy-five yards of the posi 
tion of the troops; to prevent the Indians obtaining a lodgement there, 
the train was ordered set on fire and destroyed. 

From three o'clock in the afternoon until nightfall, the Indians kept 
up a constant fire upon the position of the troops, killing fully three- 
fourths of their animals. At dark a large body of Indians charged down 
from behind Gordon's burning train, delivering volley after volley, but 
they were repulsed with the loss of several warriors seen to fall from 
their saddles. 

During the night a supply of water was obtained, better intrench- 
ments dug, the wounded cared for, dead animals dragged away, ammuni 
tion and rations distributed and, at midnight, couriers slipped away 
toward the railroad, with dispatches reporting what had occurred and 
asking for aid. 

The whole of the following day, September 30th, the Indians kept up 
an almost incessant fire, killing all of the remaining animals excepting 
fourteen mules; during the night of September 30th, the Indians sus 
pended firing, but after that time gave the troops no rest. At night on 
October 1st, a small party, while procuring water, were fired upon at close 
range and one man wounded, but the guards returned the fire, killing 
one of the Indians. 

On October 1st, Captain Dodge and Lieutenant Hughes, with Troop 
"D", 9th Cavalry, who had been scouting in that section of country, met 
the couriers who had left the intrenched position on Milk River. Appa 
rently camping for the night, to deceive any Indians near him, Captain 
Dodge issued two hundred and twenty-five rounds ammunition and three 
days rations to each man, and after dark pushed for Milk River, with but 
two officers, thirty-five men and four citizens. At four o'clock on the 
morning of October 2d, they reached the main road about five miles from 
the intrenchment on Milk River, and found the dead bodies of three 
men, near a train loaded with annuity goods, burned by the Indians. 
Half an hour later Captain Dodge arrived at the intrenchments and suc 
ceeded in forming a junction with the troops there. Captain Dodge was 
hardly inside the trenches, when the Indians opened a fire which was 
kept up at intervals for the next three days, killing all but four of 
Dodge's forty-two animals, and these four were wounded. 

The following were the casualties in Major Thornburgh's command : 
killed, Major T. T. Thornburgh, 4th Infantry, and nine enlisted men. 
Wounded, Captain Payne and Second Lieutenant Paddock, 5th Cavalry, 
Acting Assistant Surgeon Grimes and forty enlisted men. Wagonmaster 
McKinstry, guide Lowry and one teamster were killed and two teamsters 
wounded; total, twelve killed and forty-three wounded. The strength 
of the Indians, who were well armed and supplied with abundant ammu 
nition, was estimated in the official report of the affair at from three 
hundred to three hundred and fifty; the Indians themselves afterward 
admitted a loss of thirty-seven killed. 

The couriers sent out on the night of September 29th succeeded in 
getting through safely. As quickly as possible after receipt of orders at 
Fort D. A. Russell, Wyoming, Colonel W. Merritt, with Troops "A", 
"B", "I", and "M", 5th Cavalry, was upon a special train for Rawlins. 
From this point, by a march of almost unparalleled rapidity, in something 
over forty-eight hours Colonel Merritt's column, consisting of three 
hundred and fifty men, one hundred and thirty-one of whom were 
infantry following in wagons, marched one hundred and seventy miles 
over a most difficult road and reached the command at Milk River, at 
half-past five o'clock in the morning on October 5th. 

In anticipation of a general war with the Utes, a force consisting of 
nearly two thousand cavalry and infantry, was hurried to Rawlins; of 
these, 1,428 took the field, with Colonel Merritt, while 526 remained 
at Rawlins, under command of Colonel Brackett, 3rd Cavalry. Another 
force, aggregating 1,109 cavalry and infantry, commanded by Colonels E. 
Hatch, 9th Cavalry, R. S. Mackenzie, 4th Cavalry, and G. P. Buell, 15th 
Infantry, was also despatched to the Ute country, from the Department 
of the Missouri, to watch the confederated bands of Utes in Southern 
Colorado, should they attempt to join the White River Utes, in the 
hostilities which the latter had begun. 

Colonel Merritt's light advance column having reached Milk River, 
the crippled command there with the wounded were sent back to the 
railroad at Rawlins. Other troops having joined Colonel Merritt, making 
his force strong enough for an advance against the hostiles, he proceeded 
to the White River Agency, the Indians all having- disappeared before the 
troops. It was found that the Indians had burned and utterly destroyed 
the agency, had killed the employe's and the agent, Mr. Meeker, and had 
carried off all the females into the horrors of savage captivity. Colonel 
Merritt's command buried the bodies of seven men, including that of 
Mr. Meeker. 

Colonel Merritt was about moving against the hostiles, when his 
operations were suspended at the request of the Indian Department, 
pending special negotiations with the Utes for release of the captive 
females and surrender of the ringleaders in the late outrages. 

While these negotiations were in progress, however, on October 20th 
a reconnoitering party from Colonel Merritt's command, under Lieutenant 
Hall, 5th Cavalry, was attacked by the Indians about twenty miles from 
White River; they defended themselves until night, when they suc 
ceeded in returning to camp, but with the loss of Lieutenant W. B. 
Weir of the Ordnance Department and the chief scout Humme, both of 
whom were killed; two Indians were reported killed by Lieutenant Hall's 
party during the fight. 

In September New Mexico was again raided by Victoria with his 
band of Indians from old Mexico, reinforced by Mescaleros and some 
Chiricahuas. 

On September 4th the herd guard of Troop " E", 9th Cavalry, Captain 
Hooker, commanding, were attacked near Ojo Caliente, New Mexico; 
eight men were killed and forty-six horses captured by the Indians. 

On September 17th, Major Morrow, 9th Cavalry, reported that near 
Hillsboro, New Mexico, a fight occurred between a party of citizens and 
about one hundred Apaches; the hostiles killed ten of the citizens and 
captured all of their stock. 

On September 18th, Captain Dawson, with two troops of the 9th Cav 
alry, struck Victoria with about one hundred and forty Apaches, at the 
head of Las Animas River, New Mexico; Captain Beyer, with two 
more troops of the 9th Cavalry, arrived and took part in the fight, but 
the Indians having the advantage of a very strong position, the troops 
were obliged to withdraw, during the night, with a loss of five men killed 
and one wounded, thirty-two horses killed and six wounded, and two 
Navajoe scouts and one citizen killed. 

On September 26th, Major Morrow, 9th Cavalry, with six officers and 
one hundred and ninety-one men, attacked Victoria not far from Ojo 
Caliente, New Mexico, and after two days of fighting, killed three 
Indians and captured sixty horses and mules, among them twelve or 
more of those previously lost by Captain Hooker. On September 30th, 
one of Morrow's videttes was killed, whilst on post, the hostiles again 
retreating before the troops. On October 1st the scouts captured a 
squaw and a child, from whom the position of the Indians was learned,
and by a quick night march, Victoria's strongly fortified camp was cap 
tured, the Indians escaping, however, in the dark. 

Morrow's force, reduced to less than one hundred available men, 
continued pursuit of the hostiles, following them, by very hard marches, 
into old Mexico, and on October 27th again overtook Victoria, about 
twelve miles from the Corralitos River, Mexico. With about forty men 
Morrow charged the Indian breastworks, in the moonlight, and drove the 
Indians from them, losing himself one scout killed and two wounded. 
The command had been three days and nights without water, ammunition 
was nearly exhausted and men and animals were utterly worn out, so the 
troops returned, reaching Fort Bayard, New Mexico, November 3rd.