1874. 

During the year 1874 the northern portion of the Division, the Depart 
ment of Dakota, enjoyed comparative quiet. In that department were 
located the majority of the hostile bands of Sioux, some of them on reser 
vations along the Missouri River, some on Milk River farther north near 
the British boundary and others roaming over the valleys of the Big 
Horn, Yellowstone and Powder Rivers, occasionally coming into Red 
Cloud's or Spotted Tail's Agencies to draw rations and other supplies. 
Occasionally they made a dash about Fort Lincoln to steal stock, or a 
raid into Montana, with attacks once in a while upon weak bands of 
friendly Indians, such as the Mandans and Rees. This condition of 
affairs was possibly owing to the limited extent of exposed frontier in the 
Department of Dakota, which compelled the Indians there to seek for 
plunder and scalps in the Department of the Platte, south of them, where 
the frontier settlements were much more progressed and exposed. 

In order to better control the Indians making these raids, for two or 
three years it was recommended to establish a large military post in the 
country known as the Black Hills, so that by holding an interior point in 
the heart of the Indian country, the troops could threaten the villages 
and stock of the Indians if the latter raided the settlements. With the 
consent of the President, the Honorable Secretary of War, the General 
of the Army and the Honorable Secretary of the Interior, the latter hav 
ing exclusive control of Indian affairs, the Division Commander was 
authorized to make a military reconnoissance into the country about which 
only dreamy stories had hitherto been told. Fort Laramie, Wyoming, 
about one hundred miles from the Black Hills, was first selected as the 
point from which to fit out the expedition, but after two visits in person 
to that post, the Division Commander found the temper of the Indians in 
that vicinity such that an expedition from there would probably provoke 
hostilities, so attention was turned to Fort A. Lincoln, at the end of the 
Northern Pacific Railroad, as the next most suitable point of departure, 
though the distance was much greater than from Fort Laramie. General 
Terry was directed to organize a strong expedition and place it under 
the command of Lieutenant Colonel G. A. Custer, 7th Cavalry, who was 
regarded as especially fitted for such an undertaking. The reconnoissance 
was eminently successful, the country of the Black Hills was found to 
contain plenty of fine timber, considerable good soil and an abundance of 
water and grass. Gold was also discovered by the expedition, leading to 
a subsequent rush of miners and others who were with difficulty restrained 
from a general invasion of the Black Hills country. ' Upon the very satis 
factory reports of this reconnoissance, the recommendation for the estab 
lishment of a large military post in that section was earnestly renewed, 
but unfortunately for the subsequent history of Indian affairs, the con 
struction of a post was not authorized until several years later, when 
disasters had occurred which might have been averted by that greater 
familiarity with the country which would have been acquired by the 
troops intended to be stationed there. 

February 5th, Lieutenant Colonel G. P. Buell, llth Infantry, with 
Troops "G", and " D", 10th Cavalry, Company " F", llth Infantry, and 
detachments of Companies "A", and " G", llth Infantry, attacked a camp 
of Comanches on Double Mountain Fork of the Brazos River, Texas, 
killed eleven Indians and captured sixty-five horses. One enlisted man 
was wounded in the fight. 

February 9th, Lieutenant L. H. Robinson, 14th Infantry, with Cor 
poral Collins, while in charge of a lumber train returning from the gov 
ernment saw-mill near Laramie Peak, Wyoming, were wantonly murdered 
by Indians. This seemed to be the signal for other depredations and for 
the commencement of great trouble at Red Cloud's and Spotted Tail's 
Agencies, located one hundred and twenty and one hundred and fifty 
miles, respectively, north east of Fort Laramie. At the request of the 
Interior Department and at great suffering and exposure, troops had to 
be sent in the dead of winter for the protection of the Indian Agents and 
their employes at these agencies. Upon the arrival of the troops the 
hostile bands withdrew from the agencies, leaving the peacefully inclined 
to remain under the protection of the soldiers, the hostiles fleeing north 
west towards the Powder River and Big Horn valleys, sending out young 
warriors to steal stock and scalp people, whenever they could get a 
chance to do so without much danger to themselves. The acts of these 
bands seemed to fire the blood of the Northern Cheyennes and Arapa- 
hoes, two bands at that time affiliated with the Indians belonging to Red 
Cloud's Agency; they usually made their homes at "Pumpkin Butte", 
near the Powder River, or further west in the valley of the Big Horn, 
where the Wind River breaks through the Big Horn range of mountains. 
From this last named point they commenced a series of raids upon the 
friendly Shoshones near Camp Brown, (Fort Washakie,) in the Wind 
River country, stealing stock, also, from the settlers in the valleys of the 
Big and Little Popoagie Rivers. 

Up to the month of June, Indian attacks in the Departments of the 
Missouri and of Texas were infrequent. 

May 2nd, between Red River and the Big Wichita, Texas, a detachment
under command of Lieutenant Gilmore, 10th Cavalry, attacked a 
war party of Indians, but there were no casualties. 

May 18th, Captain Bentzoni, 25th Infantry, with a detachment attacked 
a war party of Indians in western Texas; no casualties. 

June 21st, Major C. C. Compton, 6th Cavalry, with a small escort of 
troops proceeding from Camp Supply, Indian Territory, to Fort Dodge, 
Kansas, were attacked by Indians on Buffalo Creek, Indian Territory, 
one enlisted man and one citizen being wounded. The same party were 
again attacked, 

June 24th, at Bear Creek redoubt, Indian Territory, but the Indians 
were repulsed with a loss of four killed and several wounded. 

Immediately following these attacks many horrible massacres occurred, 
perpetrated principally by Southern Cheyennes, assisted by Kiowas and 
Comanches, culminating in a general and determined attack upon some 
buffalo hunters who had a ranch on the main Canadian River, at Adobe 
Walls, located in what is known as the "Pan Handle" of Texas. The 
attack and defense at this place were desperate, lasting for several days, 
when the Indians withdrew with a heavy loss of life on their side. 

Before this attack, however, the Agent of the Arapahoes and South 
ern Cheyennes had been compelled to abandon his post and many lives 
were lost in the vicinity of the agency, now known as Fort Reno. Small 
parties of hostiles had also made their appearance along the frontier line 
of settlements in southern Kansas and south eastern Colorado. 

To break up a rendezvous of the Northern Cheyennes and Arapahoes, 
discovered about ninety miles from Camp Brown, Wyoming, Captain A. 
E. Bates with Troop " B", 2nd Cavalry and about one hundred and sixty 
friendly Shoshones, made a rapid march from that post and on 

July 4th, after a gallant fight, completely defeated the hostiles near 
Bad Water branch of the Wind River, in Wyoming. Twenty-six Indians 
were killed, over twenty wounded and two hundred and thirty ponies 
captured. The troops had four killed and six wounded, among the latter 
being Lieutenant R. H. Young, 4th Infantry. After this punishment 
these two bands of Northern Cheyennes and Arapahoes moved to Pump 
kin Butte and sent a delegation to Fort Fetterman, asking, with much 
bluster, whether the troops wanted war. The reply was " Yes", and that 
they would kill as many Indians as possible, unless the latter stopped 
their depredations and came into their agency. This the hostiles gen 
erally concluded to do and lost no time in coming in. Small parties of 
Sioux remained out, however, plundering and killing a number of per 
sons, until a small column of troops could be sent against them, when 
they disappeared. Numerous raids were also made upon the settlements 
in the north eastern part of Nebraska and upon the friendly Ponca 
Indians located in that vicinity, but the loss of life was very small, 
the Indians capturing, however, a large amount of stock. 

July 13th, Captain Bates with Troop "B", 2nd Cavalry, struck a war 
party of Indians near the Sweetwater, Wyoming, killed one Indian and 
captured seven horses. 

July 20th, in Palo Pinto County, Texas, a detachment of two officers, 
nine men and nine Tonkawa scouts under command of Lieutenant Colo 
nel G. P. Buell, llth Infantry, attacked a war party of Indians and cap 
tured one horse. 

The Southern Cheyennes, Kiowas, Arapahoes and other bands in the 
Indian Territory, having inaugurated in June a series of attacks upon the 
settlers, as before described, had been in the habit of escaping pursuit and 
punishment, by flying into their agencies. On the 21st of July authority 
was received through the War Department, from the Department of the 
Interior, to punish these Indians wherever they might be found, even to 
following them upon their reservations set apart for them in the Indian 
Territory. General Pope, commanding the Department of the Missouri, 
was directed to push his troops into the field and carry out these condi 
tions as far as practicable. Several columns were accordingly started 
out in the Indian Territory with the object of finding and punishing the 
bands which had been committing atrocities in the Department of the 
Missouri. Among the earliest of the engagements which took place 
under the special authority to pursue Indians taking refuge upon reser 
vations, was that which occurred 

August 22nd, at the Wichita Agency, Indian Territory, when Troops 
"E", "H", and "L", 10th Cavalry and Company "I", 25th Infantry, 
under command of Lieutenant Colonel J. W. Davidson, 10th Cavalry, 
from Fort Sill, Indian Territory, had a severe fight with a band of hostile 
Comanches and Kiowas who had taken refuge with the friendly Indians 
located at the Wichita Agency. Four enlisted men were wounded and 
the Indians lost sixteen in killed and wounded. The hostiles attempted 
to burn out the agency and the camps of the friendly Indians, in which 
the troops were posted, but were defeated in their designs. 

A column consisting of eight troops of the 6th Cavalry and four com 
panies 5th Infantry, with a section of artillery, commanded by Colonel 
N. A. Miles, 5th Infantry, was also advanced against the Indians from 
Camp Supply, Indian Territory, via the Antelope Hills. Another column, 
consisting of three troops of the 8th Cavalry and a couple of mountain 
howitzers, under Major W. R. Price, 8th Cavalry, from Forts Bascom and 
Union, New Mexico, moved down the main Canadian to join "Colonel 
Miles at or near the Antelope Hills. 

August 30th, the column of Colonel Miles encountered the Indians 
near the headwaters of the Washita and kept up a running fight for sev 
eral days, the Indians steadily falling back until they reached the hills, 
about eight miles from Salt Fork of Red River, where they made a stand 
but were promptly attacked, routed and pursued in a south westerly direction,
across the main Red River and out into the Staked Plains, with a 
loss of three killed, besides animals and camp equipage captured. The 
troops had one soldier and one civilian wounded. 

September 9th, Indians attacked Colonel Miles' supply train, escorted 
by about sixty men, commanded by Captain Lyman, 5th Infantry, on the 
Washita River, Texas, keeping it corraled there for several days until 
relief arrived from Camp Supply, Indian Territory. One enlisted man 
was killed, one soldier, a wagon-master and Lieutenant G. Lewis, 5th 
Infantry, were wounded. 

September llth and 12th, near the Washita River, a detachment of 
two scouts and four soldiers from Colonel Miles' command, in endeavor 
ing to communicate with that of Major Price, were attacked by Indians 
and four of the six wounded, one of the wounded dying in a hole in 
which the party desperately defended themselves for two days until 
relieved by troops in that vicinity. 

September 12th, the column under command of Major Price, 8th Cav 
alry, had a fight with a considerable body of Indians between Sweetwater 
and the Dry Fork of the Washita, Texas. Two Indians were reported 
killed and six wounded; the troops had fourteen horses killed and 
wounded. The column pursued the Indians for seven or eight miles 
when the hostiles scattered in every direction; about twenty Indian 
ponies were captured in the pursuit. 

September 26th and 27th, Colonel R. S. MacKenzie. with Troops "A", 
"D", "E", "F", "H", "I", and " K", 4th Cavalry, after repelling two 
Indian attacks, surprised five camps of Southern Cheyennes and their 
allies in a canon near Red River, Texas, destroyed over one hundred 
lodges and captured their entire outfit including over fourteen hundred 
horses and mules. One enlisted man was wounded and four Indians 
killed. 

October 9th, on Salt Fork of Red River, Texas, the scouts of a column 
consisting of Companies "A", "E", "F", "H", and "I", llth Infantry, 
under Lieutenant Colonel Buell, llth Infantry, struck a band of Kiowas, 
killed one of them and destroyed their camp. Pursuit was made for a 
considerable distance, the main column destroying several hundred lodges 
in various abandoned camps, but the Indians escaped northward. 

October 13th, near Gageby Creek, Indian Territory, a detachment of 
Navajoe scouts accompanying the column under Major Price, 8th Cav 
alry, from New Mexico, attacked and dispersed a war party of Indians. 

October ] 7th, about five miles north of the Washita, Indian Territory, 
Captain Chaffee with "I" Troop, 6th Cavalry, surprised an Indian camp 
and destroyed their entire outfit, the Indians escaping in great haste; no 
casualties occurred. 

An expedition having been fitted out from Fort Sill, Indian Territory, 
under command of Lieutenant Colonel .1. W. Davidson, 10th Cavalry, 
October 24th, upon Elk Creek, Indian Territory, Major G. W. Schofield
with his command of three troops of the 10th Cavalry, from General 
Davidson's column, surprised a Comanche Indian camp and charged it. 
The hostiles displayed a white flag and surrendered themselves as prison 
ers; sixty-nine warriors, besides two hundred and fifty women and chil 
dren, together with about fifteen hundred to two thousand horses were 
captured. The same day Captain Carpenter with two troops of the 10th 
Cavalry, from General Davidson's column, struck the trail of a band of 
about fifty Kiowas with two hundred head of stock. The Indians were 
pursued rapidly but scattered to escape capture, and on 

October 28th, over twenty warriors with their women, children and 
stock, surrendered themselves at Fort Sill, Indian Territory. General 
Davidson's expedition altogether captured or caused the surrender of 
ninety-one warriors and three hundred women and children, with about 
two thousand ponies, besides -capturing or destroying several villages and 
much camp equipage. 

October —, Captain A. E. Hooker with Troops "E", and "K", 9th 
Cavalry, had a fight near the Canadian River, in the Pan Handle of 
Texas, killing one Indian. 

November 3rd, Colonel R. S. Mackenzie with Troops "A", "D", "E", 
"F", "H", "I", "K", and "L", 4th Cavalry, had a fight with Indians on 
Las Lagunas Quatro, Texas, killing two Indians and capturing nineteen. 

November 6th, on McClellan Creek, Texas, Lieutenant H. J. Farns- 
worth with twenty-eight men of Troop "H", 8th Cavalry, had a fight with 
about one hundred Southern Cheyennes, killing from four to seven and 
wounding ten Indians; one enlisted man was killed, four wounded and 
six cavalry horses killed. 

November 8th, near McClellan Creek, Texas, Lieutenant F. D. Bald 
win, 5th Infantry, with a detachment consisting of Troop "D", 6th Cav 
alry and Company "D", 5th Infantry, attacked a large camp of Indians, 
routing them with the loss of much of their property. Two little white 
girls, Adelaide and Julia Germaine, aged five and seven years, were 
rescued from these Indians. The children stated that two older sisters 
were still held captive by the Indians. The story of their woe and suffer 
ing in captivity was pitiable in the extreme, not even their tender years 
sparing them from the most dreadful treatment. Their father, mother, 
brother and one sister were all murdered at the time the four sisters were 
captured. At the close of this campaign the other two sisters were 
rescued from the Indians and all four provided a comfortable, home with 
the Army at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas. General Miles became their 
guardian and Congress authorized the stoppage of an amount for the sup 
port of the children from the annuities of their captors, the Southern 
Cheyennes. 

November 8th, Troops "B", "C", "F", and "H", 10th Cavalry, 
detachments Companies "E", and "I", llth Infantry and thirty Indian 
scouts, all under command of Captain C. D. Viele, 10th Cavalry, were 
detached from Colonel Davidson's column near McClellan Creek, Texas, 
to pursue the band attacked by Lieutenant Baldwin the same day. Cap 
tain Viele's command chased the Indians for a distance of ninety-six 
miles, having several slight skirmishes with the rear guard of Indians and 
capturing a number of ponies and mules, the latter packed, which the 
Indians had abandoned in the flight. 

November 28th, Captain C. A. Hartwell with Troops "C", "H", "K", 
and "L", 8th Cavalry, attacked a war party of Southern Cheyennes near 
Muster Creek, Texas, killed two Indians, wounded two and chased the 
band for twelve miles until sundown. 

December 2nd, First Sergeant Dennis Ryan with twenty men of 
Troop "I", 6th Cavalry, discovered a band of Indians on Gageby Creek, 
Indian Territory, attacked and chased them for ten miles, killing and 
capturing from them fifty ponies, some of which were "packed or saddled. 
The detachment also destroyed a large amount of Indian property. 

December 7th, Captain A. B. Keyes with Troop "I", 10th Cavalry, 
attacked a band of Southern Cheyennes on Kingfisher Creek, Texas, cap 
turing thirteen warriors and the same number of squaws. 

December 8th, Lieutenant L. Warrington, with ten men of Troop "I", 
4th Cavalry, attacked a party of about fifteen Indians on Muchaque, 
Texas, killed two Indians, wounded one and captured one. 

December 28th, Troop "I", 10th Cavalry, Captain A. B. Keyes fol 
lowed a band of Cheyennes for eighty miles to the North Fork of the 
Canadian River, and captured the entire band consisting of fifty-two 
Indians with seventy ponies.