RECORD OF ENGAGEMENTS WITH HOSTILE INDIANS WITHIN THE MILITARY DIVISION OF THE MISSOURI,
FROM 1868 TO 1882, 
LIEUTENANT GENERAL P. H. SHERIDAN, COMMANDING. 
COMPILED FROM OFFICIAL RECORDS. 
HEADQUARTERS MILITARY DIVISION OF THE MISSOURI, CHICAGO, ILLINOIS, AUGUST IST, 1882.

INTRODUCTORY,

The information contained in the following synopsis of engagements 
with hostile Indians, is compiled from official reports and returns. 
Whilst it was possible to ascertain the exact losses of the troops 
engaged, the figures relating to those of the Indians necessarily rep 
resent the minimum. Excepting in rare instances when troops were 
in superior force and succeeded in effecting a complete surprise, de 
feat or capture of a body of Indians, the latter, according to their 
custom, bore off in the midst of the engagements, their dead and 
wounded, the number of whom could not, therefore, be ascertained; 
so the seeming disparity between the reported numbers of their killed 
and of their wounded, is accounted for by this great difficulty in ascer 
taining the extent of the latter. In many engagements, consequently, 
no mention is made of Indians wounded, although, doubtless, many really 
died from the effects of wounds received. Notably such was the case 
in the battle of the Little Big Horn, in Montana, in 1876, and it was 
only when the hostiles had finally surrendered, that interviews with the 
Indians resulted in their admitting a loss of about forty warriors killed. 
The boastful nature of the Indian, too, leads him to exalt his own deeds 
of prowess, but to conceal his losses, so that whilst he makes an exag 
gerated record of the number of enemies he has slain, keeping his score 
by notches cut upon his "coup stick", he is reluctant to admit the extent 
of his own punishment. 

Again, in the casualties to the troops, there were repeated instances 
of officers and soldiers reported wounded, who died, later, from the 
effects of the injuries received; whilst the number who were actually 
disabled for life, or entirely incapacitated for further military service, 
from the results of exposure and hardships involved by campaigns in 
pitiless winter weather, in the heart of the Indian country, far from 
shelter and supplies, will doubtless exceed the killed and wounded 
upon the field of battle. 

The Military Division of the Missouri was established January 30th, 
1865, by General Orders No. 11, War Department, series of 1865. It 
then included the Departments of the Missouri and of the North West, 
with Headquarters at St. Louis, Missouri. March 21st, 1865, by General 
Orders, 44, series of 1865, from the War Department, the Department of 
Arkansas and the Indian Territory were transferred to it from the Divi 
sion of the W^est Mississippi. June 27th, 1865, by General Orders, 118, 
series of 1865, from the War Department, the Division of the Missouri 
was merged into the Division of the Mississippi, embracing the Depart 
ments of the Ohio, of the Missouri and of Arkansas; Headquarters at St. 
Louis. August 6th, 1866, the name of the Division was changed to 
"Military Division of the Missouri", comprising the Departments of 
the Arkansas, the Missouri, the Platte and a new Department to be 
created, Dakota. 

The State of Arkansas was taken from the Division, March llth, 
1867, by General Orders, 10, series of 1867, from Headquarters of the 
Army, and on March 16th, 1869, by General Orders, 18, series of 1869, 
from Headquarters of the Army, the State of Illinois was added to the 
Division. The Department of Texas was added to the Division, Novem 
ber 1st, 1871, by General Orders, 66, series of 1871, from the War 
Department, and the Department of the Gulf was added, January 4th, 
1875. June 22nd, 1875, the limits of the Department of the Platte, 
belonging to the Division, were extended to include Fort Hall, Idaho, by 
General Orders, 65, series of 1875, from the War Department. 

At the present time, 1882, the Military Division of the Missouri con 
sists of the Departments of Dakota, the Platte, the Missouri and Texas. 

The Department of Dakota comprises the State of Minnesota and the 
Territories of Dakota and Montana. 

The Department of the Platte includes the States of Iowa and 
Nebraska, the Territories of Wyoming and Utah, and a portion of Idaho. 

The Department of the Missouri embraces the States of Illinois, Mis 
souri, Kansas and Colorado, Indian Territory and Territory of New Mex 
ico, with two posts in Northern Texas, Forts Elliott and Bliss. 

The Department of Texas consists of the State of Texas. 

The Division thus includes the territory extending from the British 
boundary on the north, to the Mexican frontier of the Rio Grande on the 
south, and from Chicago on the east, to the western boundaries of New 
Mexico, Utah and Montana, on the west. 

To garrison the military posts and to furnish troops for field opera 
tions, the present force in the Division comprises : eight regiments of 
cavalry, twenty regiments of infantry, and one battery of artillery; 
aggregating 15,940 officers and men. 


INDIANS AND INDIAN WARS, 
The principal Indian tribes living within the limits of the Division, 
are distributed as follows: 

In the north, in the Department of Dakota, are to be found the Sioux, 
Northern Cheyennes, Crows, Chippewas, Poncas, Assinaboines, Flat- 
heads, Piegans and Gros Ventres. 

In the Department of the Platte, are the Bannocks, Shoshones, Utes, 
Arapahoes, Pawnees, Winnebagoes, Pottawatomies, Omahas, Kickapoos, 
Miamis, Poncas and Otoes. 

In the Department of the Missouri, are the Northern and Southern 
Cheyennes, Arapahoes, Kiowas, Comanches, Apaches, Navajoes, Pueblos 
and semi-civilized tribes in the Indian Territory (Choctaws, Cherokees, 
Chickasaws, etc.,) while in the Department of Texas are the Lipans, 
Seminoles and Tonkawas; that Department being also the resort of the 
roving and predatory bands from New Mexico and Old Mexico. 

The taking of an Indian census is always a matter of extreme diffi 
culty, owing to the objection of the Indian against being counted. 
With the best information attainable, however, the entire number of 
Indian tribes embraced within the limits of the Military Division of the 
Missouri, is ninety-nine; aggregating about one hundred and seventy-five 
thousand persons who are scattered over an area of more than one mil 
lion square miles of frontier country. 

Since the date at which this record of engagements begins, (March 
2nd, 1868,) those tribes in the Division which have been most actively 
engaged in hostilities with the whites, are the Sioux, Northern and 
Southern Cheyennes, Kiowas, Comanches, Arapahoes, Utes and Apaches. 
In addition to the wars with these tribes, the Division has been invaded, 
at intervals, by hostiles from the outside, some of the more notable 
engagements having been with Indians belonging to the Military De 
partments of the Pacific Slope; such as the Nez Perces, the Bannocks 
and the Arizona Apaches; with periodical incursions from old Mexico, 
by bands who affiliated with our own Indians living near the Rio Grande 
frontier. 