1877.
January 9th, a detachment of Troops " H", and " L", 6th Cavalry, and 
Company "C", Indian scouts, under command of Lieutenant J. A. 
Rucker, 6th Cavalry, from the Department of Arizona, had a fight with 
a band of Indians in the mountains in the western part of New Mexico, 
killing ten Indians and capturing one; one enlisted man was wounded. 

January 12th, on Elkhorn Creek, Wyoming, a small detachment of 
Troop "A", 3rd Cavalry, had a fight with a band of Indians, three 
enlisted men being wounded. 

February 23rd, near Dead wood, Dakota, Lieutenant J. F. Cummings, 
with Troop "C", 3rd Cavalry, attacked a war party of Indians, killing 
one Indian and re-capturing six hundred sheep, seventeen horses and 
seven head of cattle. 

May 4th, Captain P. L. Lee, with Troop "G", 10th Cavalry, had a 
fight with Indians near Lake Quemado, Texas, killing four and capturing 
six; one enlisted man was killed, sixty-nine head of stock we're captured, 
and twelve lodges, with their contents destroyed. On May 6th, three 
more lodges and their supplies were burned by Captain Lee's command 
in Canon Resecata. 

The prisoners which Colonel Miles' command captured from Crazy 
Horse's village, on the night of January 7th, proved a valuable acquisi 
tion in communicating with the hostiles and in arranging negotiations 
for their surrender. On February 1st Colonel Miles sent out a scout, 
with two of the captives, offering terms on which a surrender would be 
accepted, informing the hostiles that a non-compliance would result in a 
movement of the troops against them. Following up the trail from the 
scene of the engagement of January 8th, near the Wolf Mountains, the 
Indians were found camped on a tributary of the Little Big Horn. The 
mission was successfully executed and on February 19th the scout 
returned with nineteen Indians, mainly chiefs and leading warriors, who 
desired to learn the exact conditions upon which they could surrender. 
The terms were repeated, viz : unconditional surrender and compliance 
with such orders as might be received from higher authority. 
The delegation returned to their village, the camps moved to near 
the forks of Powder River, for a general council and a large 
delegation of leading chiefs came in, March 18th, to learn whether 
further concessions could be obtained from Colonel Miles. They 
were informed that there would be no change in previous conditions 
and that it would be equally satisfactory if the Indians surrendered at the 
more southern agencies, but that they must do one thing or the other, or 
troops would be immediately sent out after them. Crazy Horse's uncle, 
named "Little Hawk", with others, then guaranteed to either bring the 
Indian camp to the cantonment at Tongue River, or to take it to the 
lower agencies, leaving in Colonel Miles' hands as a pledge of good 
faith, nine hostages, prominent men and head warriors of both tribes. 
Three hundred Indians led by "Two Moons", "Hump", and other chiefs, 
surrendered to Colonel Miles on April 22d. The largest part of the 
bands, numbering more than two thousand, led by Crazy Horse, Little 
Hawk, and others, moved southward and surrendered at the Red Cloud 
and Spotted Tail Agencies in May. 

Crazy Horse and his people were placed on the reservation, near 
Camp Robinson, where, for a time, they appeared quiet and peaceable, 
but in a few months the restraints of this new position became so irksome 
to Crazy Horse, that he began to concoct schemes again involving his 
people in war. It was determined, therefore, to arrest and confine him. 
Whilst on his way to the guard-house, he broke from those around him 
and attempted to escape by hewing his way, with a knife, through the 
circle of sentinels and by-standers. In the melee, he was fatally wounded 
and died on the night of September 7th. 

In the meantime Sitting Bull's camp had gathered near the Yellow 
stone, and when Crazy Horse and his confederates decided to place them 
selves under subjection to the Government, Sitting Bull's band, in order 
to avoid surrendering and to escape further pursuit, retreated beyond the 
northern boundary and took refuge on Canadian soil, the party being in 
a very destitute condition, almost out of ammunition and having lost 
nearly everything excepting their guns and horses. 

From those who had surrendered, Colonel Miles learned that a band 
of renegades, chiefly Minneconjous, under "Lame Deer", had determined 
not to yield, had broken off from those who surrendered at Tongue 
River, and had moved westward. This was about April 22d, and as soon 
as the necessary forage could be obtained, on May 1st, Colonel Miles, 
with a force consisting of Troops "F", "G", "H", and "L", 2d Cavalry, 
Companies "E", and "H", 5th Infantry, and "E", "F", "G", and "H", 
22d Infantry, started up Tongue River. At a point sixty-three miles 
from its mouth, they cut loose from the wagons, struck across to and 
moved up the Rosebud, and after a very hard march, with scarcely a halt 
during two nights and one day, the command surprised Lame Deer's 
band on May 7th, near the mouth of Muddy Creek, an affluent of the 
Rosebud. The village was charged in fine style and the Indian herd 
of animals cut off and secured. The Indians were called on to surren 
der; Lame Deer and " Iron Star", his head warrior, appeared desirous 
of doing so, but after shaking hands with some of the officers, the Indians 
either meditating treachery or fearing it, again began firing. This ended 
peace making and the fight was resumed, the hostiles being driven, in a 
running fight, eight miles, across the broken country, to the Rosebud. 
Fourteen Indians were killed, including Lame Deer and Iron Star, four 
hundred and fifty horses, mules and ponies, and the entire Indian camp 
outfit were captured, including fifty-one lodges well stored with supplies. 
Lieutenant A. M. Fuller, 2d Cavalry, was slightly wounded; four enlisted 
men were killed and six were wounded. The Indians who escaped sub- 
sequently moved eastward to the Little Missouri and the command re 
turned to the cantonment, where four companies, "B", "F", "G", and 
"I", 5th Infantry, were mounted with the Indian ponies and continued 
to serve as cavalry until after the Nez Percys campaign in the following 
autumn. 

During the remainder of May and the early part of June, the force 
under Colonel Miles, commanding the district of the Yellowstone, was 
increased by eleven troops of the 7th Cavalry, four companies of the 1st 
Infantry, and two of the llth Infantry. A portion of these were sent 
to assist in the construction of the new post on the Big Horn, (now Fort 
Custer,) and field operations were continued by several separate columns 
from Colonel Miles' force. 

One of these detachments, consisting of six companies of the 22d 
Infantry, three companies of the 1st Infantry, and one troop of the 
7th Cavalry, under command of Major H. M. Lazelle, 1st Infantry, 
on June 16th, left Tongue River, dropped down by boat to below the 
mouth of Powder River, marched thence beyond the Box Elder, on the 
Upper Little Missouri, and struck the trail of Lame Deer's band. This 
was followed nearly to Sentinel Buttes, the advance overtaking and skir 
mishing with a part of the band. 

A second detachment, consisting of three troops of the 2d Cavalry 
and one piece of artillery, was sent by boat from Tongue River to Glen- 
dive, July 2d, with orders to march towards the Little Missouri and to 
try to intercept the Indians pursued by Major Lazelle. The two forces 
united on the Yellowstone about July 18th, and the three troops of the 
2d Cavalry, reinforced by three companies, " A", " H", and " I", 5th In 
fantry, mounted, were placed under command of Major J. S. Brisbin, 2d 
Cavalry. These two commands moved across the Little Missouri, follow 
ing the trail of the Indians up that stream to Short Pine Hills. Major 
Lazelle's force then returned with the wagons to Wolf Rapids and sub 
sequently to Tongue River, arriving there about the end of August. 
Brisbin's column, with pack animals, continued the pursuit of the Indians 
across the Little Powder River, then to the main Powder and over the 
Wyoming boundary, gaining upon the hostiles and causing them to 
abandon some of their property, but without succeeding in getting a 
fight. Worn out by the hard marching and pursuit, Brisbin's column 
returned by the valleys of Powder and Tongue Rivers to the canton 
ment at the mouth of the latter, where it arrived August 30th; the In 
dians, continually pursued and harrassed by the troops, moved south 
ward to Red Cloud and Spotted Tail Agencies, surrendering there dur 
ing the months of July, August and September. 

In the latter part of July, the Nez Perec's Indians, pursued by Gen 
eral Howard, with troops from the Department of the Columbia, made 
their way, via the Lo-Lo trail, toward Montana; Captain Rawn, 7th Infantry,
promptly threw a small force consisting of his company of thirty 
men and a few citizen volunteers, into the Lo-Lo Pass, where they in 
trenched themselves in the canon, determined to dispute the entrance of 
" Chief Joseph " and his band into Montana. 

On July 27th, Captain Rawn had a talk with the Nez Perec's, who 
proposed, if unmolested, to march peaceably through the Bitter Root 
valley, but Captain Rawn refused to allow them to pass without the war 
riors surrendering their arms. Another council was arranged for the fol 
lowing day, July 28th, Captain Rawn hoping to detain the Nez Perces 
until General Howard's troops, or expected assistance from Fort Shaw, 
Montana, under Colonel Gibbon, should arrive. 

After the second council, the Nez Perces refused to comply with Cap 
tain Rawn's demands and, by climbing the hills, succeeded in passing 
around his flank into the Bitter Root valley. Captain Rawn then aban 
doned his breastworks, formed a skirmish line across the canon and ad 
vanced in the direction the Indians had taken, but they retreated into 
the Bitter Root; only about a dozen or twenty of the volunteers remain 
ing with Captain Rawn's small company, it was obliged to return to its 
post near Missoula. 

Colonel J. Gibbon, 7th Infantry, having collected from the posts in 
Montana, several companies of his regiment, started from Fort Shaw for 
Missoula, one hundred and fifty miles distant, making the march in seven 
days. He reached the new post, there, on the afternoon of August 3rd, 
his force consisting of companies " A", " D", " F", u G", " I", and " K", 
7th Infantry, with about thirty-five citizen volunteers, aggregating one 
hundred and ninety-one officers and men. 

With this command Colonel Gibbon started in pursuit of the Indians, 
who had turned southward up the valley of the Bitter Root, and after 
five days of terrible climbing over the rugged and broken country inter 
vening, the Nez Perces village was overtaken, on the night of the 8th 
of August, in the " Big Hole Basin", Montana. The troops quietly 
made their way;, in the darkness, through the Indian herd of ponies, and 
stationed themselves near the village, the command lying down to wait 
for dawn. 

As day began to break, the troops, in perfect silence, moved to their 
positions for attack, a deep slough, with water waist deep, having to be 
crossed before reaching the Indian camp. Suddenly a single shot was 
heard on the extreme left, followed quickly by others, and the line of 
men sprang forward. A heavy fire was at once opened along the entire 
length of the Indian " teepees", the startled Nez Perces rushing from 
their lodges in every direction, many taking refuge in the brush and 
behind the bank of the creek, along which the village lay. A destruc 
tive fire. was poured into the troops, as the latter came into the open 
ground, but in less than twenty minutes they were in full possession oT 
the camp and orders were given for its destruction. 

Whilst part of the men were engaged in burning the lodges, the 
Indians kept up a fire from their sheltered positions, officers and men 
falling rapidly under these well directed shots, until orders were reluc 
tantly given to withdraw from the village and take shelter in the timber. 
This movement was successfully accomplished, the troops carrying off 
with them such of their wounded as could be found, the Nez Perec's fol 
lowing closely and keeping up a constant fire. The fighting continued 
with activity all day, the Indians attempting to burn out the troops, by 
setting fire to the grass and woods, and during the night shots were 
occasionally discharged into the position of the troops. 

In the night march, on August 8th, to surprise and attack the camp, 
the supply train had to be left behind, so that the troops were wholly 
without food, blankets, or medicine for the wounded, all being forced to 
satisfy hunger, as well as they could, with the flesh of their dead horses. 
About eleven o'clock at night, on August 10th, the Indians gave the 
troops a parting volley and disappeared. 

On the morning of August llth, parties were sent out by Gibbon to 
bury the dead, all of whom were found and properly interred. At ten 
o'clock in the morning, General Howard, with a small escort from his 
column, reached Gibbon's position, and preparations were at once made 
to resume the pursuit. 

In this engagement the casualties were very great, considering the 
small size of the force engaged, and were as follows : Killed, Captain 
William Logan and First Lieutenant James H. Bradley, 7th Infantry, 
twenty-one enlisted men and six citizens; total killed, twenty-nine. 
Wounded, Colonel John Gibbon, Captain C. Williams, two wounds; 
First Lieutenant C. A. Coolidge, three wounds; First Lieutenant Wil 
liam L. English, two wounds, one wound mortal; Second Lieutenant C. 
A. Woodruff, three wounds; four citizen volunteers wounded and thirty- 
one enlisted men, one of the latter mortally; total killed and wounded, 
sixty-nine, out of a strength of one hundred and ninety-one. Lieutenant 
English died of his wounds August 19th. 

Captain Comba, who commanded the burial party, reported finding 
the bodies of eighty-nine dead Indians on the field. 

On August 13th, fifty of Colonel Gibbon's badly crippled force vol 
unteered, under Captain Browning and Lieutenants Wright and Van 
Orsdale, to go with General Howard in pursuit of the hostiles, and Col 
onel Gibbon proceeded with the wounded to Deer Lodge, Montana, 
ninety-miles distant, where they arrived on August 16th. Captain R. 
Norwood, with Troop " L", 2d Cavalry, started from Fort Ellis, August 
8th, to join Colonel Gibbon in the field, but while en route was ordered 
to report to General Howard. 

After leaving the Big Hole battle ground, the Nez Percys proceeded 
south, past the town of Bannock, murdering settlers and stealing stock 
as they went. They then crossed the main divide of the Rocky Moun 
tains, east of Fort Lemhi, turned east and recrossed the Rockies again, 
near Henry's Lake, moved thence to the Madison River, up that stream 
to the Geyser Basin and through that to the Yellowstone. This they 
crossed, and then moved, by an irregular course, to Clark's Fork and 
down that to its junction with the Yellowstone, closely pursued by Gen 
eral Howard's wearied troops and the detachment from Colonel Gibbon's 
command. 

Early in the morning of August 20th, at Camas Meadows, Idaho, the" 
Nez Perces succeeded in capturing about one hundred mules from Gen 
eral Howard; Major San ford, with two troops of the 1st Cavalry, and 
that of Captain Norwood, pursued with great energy, struck the Indians 
and recaptured about fifty of the animals. In this attack Lieutenant H. 
M. Benson, 7th Infantry, attached to Captain Norwood's troop, and six 
enlisted men were wounded; one enlisted man wras killed. 

Information of the direction' the Nez Perces were taking having been 
transmitted by telegraph, Colonel Sturgis, with Troops "F", "G", "H", 
"I", "L", and "M", 7th Cavalry, numbering about three hundred and 
sixty men, was dispatched from the neighborhood of Tongue River, to 
try to intercept the hostiles in the direction of. Judith Gap. On August 
27th, Colonel Sturgis received, by way of Fort Ellis, a telegram from 
General Howard, dated the 25th, at Virginia City, Montana, stating that 
the hostiles would cross the Stinking River, about one hundred miles 
southeast of the Crow Agency : he also reqeived information through 
his scouting parties which satisfied him that the Nez Percys were still 
south of the Yellowstone, so Colonel Sturgis decided to watch both the 
Stinking River and Clark's Fork. On September 8th he struck the trail, 
and on September llth met the exhausted troops of General Howard in 
the vicinity of Clark's Fork. 

Colonel Sturgis pushed on, with his own command, hoping by forced 
marches of fifty or sixty miles per day, for three or four days, to over 
take the Nez Perces; so, joined by about fifty men of Troops "C", and 
"K", 1st Cavalry, and two mountain howitzers from General Howard's 
expedition, the chase was resumed. At the same time word was sent by 
couriers to Colonel Miles, at Tongue River, notifying him of the course 
the Nez Perec's were last following, in the belief that he might, by a 
rapid direct march from his post, intercept the hostiles still further to the 
north. 

The first day after leaving General Howard, Colonel Sturgis marched 
fifty miles, and the next morning, September 13th, he reached the Yel 
lowstone and crossed the river. The Nez Perces being reported in sight, 
the column moved rapidly down the valley six or seven miles, the advance 
guard attacking a few Indian skirmishers posted behind the crests of 
some ridges. Colonel Sturgis' entire force soon became engaged and 
drove these Indians back upon their main body which was moving up 
Cailon Creek. The Indians strongly occupied both the cafion and high 
ground on each side of it, but they were steadily driven by the troops 
from rock to rock, toward the head of the canon, when nightfall put an 
end to the fight. 

The loss of the Indians in this engagement and in the pursuit on the 
following day, was twenty-one killed; the loss of the troops was three 
enlisted men killed and Captain T. H. French, 7th Cavalry, and eleven 
enlisted men wounded; the number of ponies lost by the Indians was 
altogether about nine hundred. 

Early on September 14th, Sturgis resumed the pursuit, preceeded by 
a large party of Crow scouts, who killed five more of the rear guard of 
the Nez Perces and captured four hundred of the entire number of ponies 
taken by Sturgis' command. Worn out by incessant marching, the 
troops could do little, however, to diminish the distance between them 
selves and the Indians, every officer and man of the cavalry taken from 
General Howard's column, being on foot, owing to the exhausted condition 
of their horses. For several days the troops had been wholly without 
rations and the limit of endurance had been reached by both men and 
animals; Colonel Sturgis accordingly discontinued his pursuit and waited 
for General Howard to overtake him, when both commands were united, 
and marched together from the Musselshell to the Missouri, reaching 
Carroll, on October 1st. General Howard proceeded by boat to Cow 
Island, leaving Colonel Stuxgis in command of the troops. 

The night of September 17th, Colonel Miles received the communica 
tions informing him of the movements of the Nez Perces; he at once 
started from Tongue River, September 18th, and marched rapidly in a 
northwest direction to intercept the enemy. His force consisted of 
Troops "F", UG", and «H", 3rd Cavalry, "A", " D", and " K", 7th 
Cavalry and Companies "B", "F", "-G", "I", and "K", 5th Infantry, 
(mounted,) two pieces of light artillery and a detachment of white and 
Indian scouts; he decided to push for the gap between the northern end 
of the Little Rocky and the Bear Paw Mountains. On September 23rd 
the Nez Perec's crossed the Missouri, at Cow Island, destroying the public 
and private stores there. A detachment of twelve men, under Sergeant 
Molchert, 7th Infantry, was stationed at this point, in a slight intrench- 
ment; they were repeatedly charged by the Nez Percys, who were, 
however, as often repulsed by the little garrison consisting of but four 
citizens and Sergeant Molchert's detachment; two of the citizens were 
wounded. 

Major Ilges, 7th Infantry, commanding at Fort Benton, received 
information, on September 21st, that the Nez Percys were approaching 
Fort Claggett; he immediately started with his single weak company of 
the 7th Infantry and a party of thirty-six citizen volunteers, and reached 
Claggett the next day. On September 26th a skirmish ensued, lasting 
two hours, one of the volunteers being killed. Major Ilges, feeling that 
his force was not strong enough to continue the pursuit, he withdrew to 
Cow Island. 

On September 25th. Colonel Miles received, through the citizens who 
had escaped from Cow Island, information that the Indians had crossed 
the Missouri, so he began very rapid forced marches which brought his 
command to the Bear Paw range on September 29th. 

On September 30th, at seven o'clock in the morning, after a march 
of two hundred and sixty-seven miles, Colonel Miles' command was upon 
the trail of the Nez Perces and their village was reported only a few 
miles away. It was located within the curve of a cresent shaped cut 
bank in the valley of Snake Creek and this, with the position of some 
warriors in ravines leading into the valley, rendered it impossible, for his 
scouts to determine the full size and strength of the camp. The whole 
column, however, advanced at a rapid gait, the leading battalion of the 
2d Cavalry being sent to make a slight detour, attack in rear, and cut off 
and secure the herd. This was done in gallant style, the battalion, in a 
running fight, capturing upwards of eight hundred ponies; the battalions 
of the 7th Cavalry and the 5th Infantry charged, mounted, directly 
upon the village. 

The attack was met by a desperate resistance and every advance was 
stubbornly contested by the Indians, but with a courageous persistence, 
fighting dismounted, the troops secured command of the whole Indian 
position, excepting the beds of the ravines in which some of the warriors 
were posted. A charge was made on foot by a part of the 5th Infantry 
down a slope and along the open valley of the creek into the village, but 
the fire of the Indians soon disabled thirty-five per cent of the detach 
ment which made this assault, and attempts to capture the village, by 
such means, had to be abandoned. 

In the first charge by the troops and during the hot fighting which 
followed, Captain O. Hale, 7th Cavalry, Lieutenant J. W. Biddle, 7th 
Cavalry, and twenty-two enlisted men were killed; Captains Moylan and 
Godfrey, 7th Cavalry, First Lieutenants Baird and Romeyn, 5th Infantry, 
and thirty-eight enlisted men were wounded. 

The Indian herd having been captured, the eventual escape of the 
village became almost impossible. The casualties to the troops had 
amounted to twenty per cent of the force engaged, there were many 
wounded to care for, and there were neither tents nor fuel, a cold wind 
and snow storm prevailing on the night of September 30th, so Colonel 
Miles determined to simply hold his advantage for a time, notifying 
General Howard and Colonel Sturgis of the situation; Colonel Sturgis 
received Colonel Miles' dispatch on the evening of October 2d, and at 
once started his troops for the battle field. 

On the morning of October 1st, however, communication was opened 
between Colonel Miles' troops and the Indians, and Chief Joseph, with 
several of his warriors, appeared under a flag of truce: they expressed a 
willingness to surrender, and brought up a part of their arms, (eleven 
rifles and carbines,) but being suspicious, the Nez Percys remaining in 
camp hesitated to come forward and lay down their arms. While Chief 
Joseph remained in Colonel Miles' camp, Lieutenant Jerome, 3rd Cavalry, 
was sent to ascertain what was going on in the village; he went into the 
Indian camp and was detained there by the Nez Percys, unharmed, until 
Joseph returned on the afternoon of October 2d. General Howard with 
a small escort, arrived upon the scene, on the evening of October 4th, in 
time to be present at the full surrrender of the Indians. 

During the fight with Colonel Miles' command, seventeen Indians 
were killed and forty wounded; the surrender included eighty-seven war 
riors, one hundred and eighty-four squaws and one hundred and forty- 
seven children. The prisoners were first sent to Fort A. Lincoln, thence, 
to Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, and were finally located in the Indian 
Territory. 

February 22d, 1877, a buffalo hunter, named Soule, was killed near 
the Staked Plains. 

March 7th, 1877, four miles from Fort Davis, Deroteo Cardinas and 
John Williams were killed. 

The Commanding Officer Fort Clark, Texas, reported three persons 
killed by Indians on April 20th, 21st, and 22d, 1877. 

May 30th, 1877, Bescento Acosta was killed by Apaches, about four 
miles from Fort Davis. 

August 1st, 1877, Henry Dill, a stage driver, was killed at El Muerto, 
Texas and on the same day, four miles from that place, a man named 
Sandy Ball was killed. 

A Mexican was killed, near Uvalde, November 16th, and two Mexi 
can herders were also killed, near Fort Clark, on November 18th. 

December 23rd, Gabriel Valdez and Horan Parsons were killed in 
Bass Canon, near Van Horn's Wells, Texas. 