1869.
Whilst the majority of the Indians who had been devastating the lines 
of the Arkansas, the Smoky Hill and the southern tributaries of the 
Republican, were now upon reservations, depredating continued in vari 
ous localities, and engagements with Indians were constantly reported. 

January 28th, among the settlements on the Solomon River, a scouting 
party of the 7th Cavalry had two men wounded, six Indians being 
reported killed and ten wounded. 

January 29th, on Mulberry Creek, Kansas, a detachment of Cavalry 
under Captain Edward Byrne, 10th Cavalry, had a fight in which two 
men were wounded »nd six Indians killed. 

February 7th, troops from Fort Selden, New Mexico, pursued Indians 
who had stolen stock three miles from that post, but the marauders 
escaped into the mountains before they could be overtaken. 

March 9th, near Fort Harker, Kansas, Indians with stolen stock were 
overtaken by troops, five Indians captured and all the stock recovered. 

March 17th, near Fort Bayard, New Mexico, Apaches committed 
some murders and depredations. Troops pursued them hotly to their 
village which, with its contents, was burned and five Indians wounded; 
no casualties to the troops. 

April 7th, on the Musselshell River, Montana, detachments of Com 
panies "D", "F", and "G", 13th Infantry, commanded by Captain E. 
W. Clift, 13th Infantry, had a fight in which nine Indians were killed; 
one soldier was killed and two wounded. 

April 16th, near Fort Wallace, Kansas, Indians attacked and chased 
an officer and his escort into the post, but without casualties on either 
side. 

April 20th, in the Department of the Missouri, troops pursued maraud 
ing Indians, — locality not stated, — wounded three Indians, burned their 
camp and recovered fifty head of stolen stock. 

April 22nd, in Sangre Canon, New Mexico, a cavalry scouting party 
overtook a band of hostile Indians, wounding five of them, and recover 
ing nineteen horses and a stolen cheque for $500. 

May 2nd, near San Augustine, New Mexico, Indians ambushed a train 
guarded by soldiers and made a desperate but unsuccessful effort to cap 
ture it. Two soldiers were killed and four wounded; five Indians were 
killed and ten reported wounded. 

May 10th, at Fort Hays, Kansas, Indian prisoners made a murderous 
assault with knives upon their guards, mortally wounding the Sergeant 
in charge, but were overpowered. 

Extensive field operations against the southern Indians having been 
relieved by the surrender of large numbers and the escape northward of 
bands who went in that direction to join their allies 'in the neighborhood 
of the Platte, the column of seven troops of the 5th Cavalry which, under 
General Carr, had scouted southward from Fort Lyon, the previous 
winter, marching upwards of twelve hundred miles, was directed to 
proceed across the country from the Arkansas to the Platte, carefully 
patroling the valleys of the intermediate streams for any bands of hos- 
tiles lurking there. The command left the vicinity of Fort Wallace, 
Kansas, May 10th, and on the 13th found indications of Indians upon 
Beaver Creek. A party of ten men, under Lieutenant Ward, were sent 
to reconnoitre and about eight miles from " Elephant Rock", saw the 
smoke of a large village. Lieutenant Ward's reconnoissance was dis 
covered by a hunting party of Indians and his detachment narrowly 
escaped capture, being obliged to charge through the. Indians in regaining 
the main column. The latter in full force galloped off to the attack of 
the village which had taken flight, upon their discovering the troops, the 
warriors remaining back to fight and cover the retreat of their families. 
The column made a brilliant charge in which three soldiers were killed 
and four wounded; of the Indians, twenty-five were reported killed 
and fifty wounded. Night came on and the following morning, after 
destroying the Indian camp with much of its property, the pursuit was 
taken up, the wagon train dropped with an escort, and the column, 
with five days rations on their horses, pushed ahead upon the trail. This 
was followed energetically and on May 16th, on Spring Creek, Nebraska, 
the advance guard under Lieutenant Volkmar, 5th Cavalry, overtook the 
Indians, about four hundred warriors strong, who turned upon the party 
and nearly captured it, after a determined resistance in which three 
soldiers were wounded and many of the horses, the detachment defend 
ing themselves stoutly behind the bodies of their horses against repeated 
charges. The main column arrived in time to rescue the advance guard, 
the Indians taking flight before they could be struck in force. A hot 
chase for some fifteen miles ensued across the Republican again south 
ward, the Indians at dark breaking up into small parties which descended 
anew upon the Kansas settlements. The column proceeded to the 
Platte River, whence, after refitting at Fort McPherson, it returned to 
search for the Indians who proved to be the "Dog Soldier" Cheyennes. 

May 18th, Indians ran off stock near Fort Bayard, New Mexico, 
were pursued by troops and their village destroyed. 

May 25th, the settlements in Jewell County, Kansas, were raided, six 
citizens killed and three women outraged. 

May 26th, near the town of Sheridan, Kansas, Indians attacked a 
wagon train, wounded two teamsters and ran off three hundred mules. 

May 29th, Indians attacked Fossil Station, Kansas, killed two persons, 
wounded four, and at night threw a train from the track of the Kansas 
Pacific Railway. 

May 30th, on Salt Creek, Kansas, Indians killed a settler, attacked 
three couriers of the 7th Cavalry and chased them for ten miles. They 
also attacked three government teamsters, near Fort Hays, Kansas, and 
drove them into the post. 

May 31st, a government train was attacked on Rose Creek, Kansas; 
two sojdiers and five Indians were reported wounded. 

June 1st, on Solomon River, Kansas, the ca.mp of a detachment of the 
7th Cavalry was attacked, one soldier and one Indian were reported 
wounded, and three Indian ponies were captured by the troops. On the 
same day, the settlements on the Solomon River were raided, thirteen 
men killed, houses burned and about one hundred and fifty head of stock 
run off. A detachment of cavalry followed the trail in pursuit, but with 
out success. 

June 4th, Indians pulled up the track of the railroad at Grinnell Sta 
tion, Kansas, but were repulsed by the military guard there. 

June 10th, on the Solomon River, Kansas, Indians attempted to stam 
pede the stock at the camp of a scouting party, but were fired upon by 
the sentinels and escaped. On the same day the settlements on Asher 
Creek, Kansas, were raided and fifteen head of stock run off. The Indians 
were pursued ten miles by a party of cavalry, were attacked and the 
stolen stock recovered. 

June llth, on the Solomon River, Indians attacked the flankers of an 
artillery command under Captain Graham, 1st Artillery, but were routed 
and pursued. 

June 12th, on the Solomon, some cavalry struck and pursued the trail 
of a band which had been depredating upon that stream, but did not suc 
ceed in overtaking the Indians. At Edinburg, Kansas, Indians ran off 
twenty head of cattle, were pursued and the stock recovered. The set 
tlements on the Solomon were again raided, about ten persons killed and 
some two hundred and fifty head of stock run off. 

June 19th, near Sheridan, Kansas, a surveying party, escorted by a 
detachment of the 7th Cavalry were attacked; the escort had two men 
wounded, but repulsed the Indians with a loss of four killed and twelve 
wounded. The same day Indians attacked a government train near Fort 
Wallace, Kansas, and drove it into the post; troops from the garrison 
pursued the Indians, capturing one pony; no casualties. 

June 20th, at Scandinavia, Kansas, the settlement was raided by 
Indians; they were pursued by a detachment of cavalry and one Indian 
killed. 

June 26th, Indians dashed into the town of Sheridan, Kansas, killed 
one man and pursued another who, however, escaped. 

These depredations were doubtless mostly committed by the large 
band which had been fought by General Carr's command, on the Beaver 
and other streams, in May. This column of seven troops 5th Cavalry, 
having refitted at Fort McPherson, Nebraska, returned, with three 
mounted companies of Pawnees, to the vicinity of the Beaver and Solo 
mon, found several trails of the Indians and followed them until they 
united upon the Republican River, not far from the scene of Forsyth's 
severe fight the preceding September. 

July 5th, three troops of the 5th Cavalry, and one company of Rawnee 
scouts, from this column, under the command of Major W. B. Royall, 5th 
Cavalry, struck a war party, not far north of the Republican, killed three, 
wounded several and the balance escaped; the troops returned to the 
camp of the main column on the Republican. 

July 8th, a detachment of four men, Troop " M", 5th Cavalry, in com 
ing back to the camp of General Carr's command, were attacked by 
Indians; Corporal Kyle, in charge of this party, made a very gallant 
defense, wounding two of the Indians and succeeding in reaching the 
camp. A dash was made into the camp, about midnight, by Indians 
attempting to stampede the herd; one of the Pawnee sentinels was 
wounded but the Indians were driven off without other loss to the com 
mand. The next day the trail of the Indians was pursued rapidly, the 
wagons dropped with an escort, and on 

July llth, the main village was completely surprised on " Summit 
Springs", a small tributary of the South Platte, in Colorado. Seven 
troops of the 5th Cavalry and three companies of mounted Pawnee 
scouts charged the village which, with its contents, was captured and 
burned. Fifty-two Indians were killed, an unknown number wounded, 
and seventeen captured, among the killed being " Tall Bull", the chief 
of the band. Two hundred and seventy-four horses, one hundred and 
forty-four mules, quantities of arms and ammunition and about $1,500 in 
U. S. money, were among the more important items of the extensive cap 
tures. So perfect was the surprise and so swift the charge, over a dis 
tance of several miles, that the Indians could do little but spring upon 
their ponies and fly, and the casualties to the troops were only one sol 
dier wounded, one horse shot and twelve horses killed by the hot and 
exhausting charge. In the Indian camp were two unfortunate white 
women captives from the Kansas settlements, a Mrs. Alderdice and a 
Mrs. Wiechell. The former had a baby whom the Indians had strangled. 
After enduring the saddest miseries, whilst prisoners, at the very moment 
of rescue by the troops, both women were shot by the Indians. Mrs. Alder- 
dice was found dead, with her skull crushed in; Mrs. Wiechell was shot in 
the breast, but the bullet was extracted from her back by the surgeon,
Dr. Tesson. Mrs. Alderdice was laid in a grave dug where she perished, 
the troops assembled and the burial service read over her by an officer. 
With such care as the troops could afford Mrs. Wiechell whilst on the 
march, she was carried to Fort Sedgwick, Colorado, where she eventually 
recovered, the soldiers turning over the captured money to this unhappy 
woman who had seen her husband murdered and mutilated, her home and 
friends destroyed and had herself, according to her own pitiful and 
broken story, been the victim of miseries almost too awful for descrip 
tion. 

July 10th to July 17th, in New Mexico, upon the stage route the 
coaches were attacked three times in one week, the Indians capturing all 
the mails, robbing the passengers and killing ten persons, in all. 

July 25th, troops struck the trail of hostile Indians near Fort Stanton, 
New Mexico, pursued the savages to their village, totally destroyed it, and 
recaptured three stolen mules, the Indians escaping amongst the canons; 
no casualties.

July 27th, troops pursued a band of Indians who had committed 
depredations in New Mexico, overtaking and charging the savages, 
wounding three of them, capturing three Indian ponies and recovering 
some stolen stock. 

August 2nd, the column of the 5th Cavalry with three companies of Paw 
nee scouts, which had struck Tall Bull's camp at " Summit Springs", July 
llth, having refitted at Fort Sedgwick, Colorado, started out again under 
command of Colonel Royall, 5th Cavalry, to hunt for the Indians who 
had escaped from that fight. Just as the column was about camping, 
after its first day's march south of Fort Sedgwick, the Indians were 
struck, but escaped as night fell. The pursuit was taken up, next morn 
ing, and the trail hotly followed for two hundred and twenty-five miles, 
to north of the Niobrara River, Dakota, where the chase had to be 
abandoned, the country being almost impassable, even without the train, 
and the horses of the cavalry being completely worn out. The Indians 
abandoned large quantities of camp equipage, which were destroyed, two 
mules and forty horses and ponies being captured by the command. 

August 3rd, at Fort Stevenson, Dakota, Indians attempted to stampede 
the herd, but were defeated and pursued by the garrison, the Indians 
losing one horse; no casualties to the troops. 

August 9th, Indians destroyed one hundred and fifty yards of the tel 
egraph line at Grinnell Station, Kansas, but were frightened off by the 
military guard at the station. 

August 15th, near San Augustine Pass, New Mexico, Troops "F", and 
"H", 3rd Cavalry, under Captain F. Stanwood, 3rd Cavalry, had a fight of 
which no details are given. 

August 19th, Colonel De Trobriand, 13th Infantry, commanding Fort 
Shaw, Montana, reported an attack by Piegan Indians upon a government
train from Camp Cooke; also the murder of a citizen named Clarke 
and the wounding of his son, near Helena, Montana. The teamsters with 
the train in the fight which took place on Eagle Creek, killed four and 
wounded two Indians, losing one man killed and twenty oxen. Subse 
quently hostilities were carried on at different points in the vicinity, cat 
tle carried off and white men murdered, the hostiles appearing to be 
Bloods, Blackfeet and Piegans. 

August 21st, Indians attacked Coyote' Station, Kansas, but were 
repulsed by the military guard there; no casualties. 

September 5th, troops from Fort Stanton, New Mexico, pursued and 
routed a band of hostile Indians of whom it was estimated three were 
killed and seven wounded. The troops had two men wounded. 

September 12th, near Laramie Peak, Wyoming, an escort to a train 
had a fight in which one soldier was killed and one wounded. 

September 14th, near Little Wind River, Wyoming, Mr. James Camp 
and Private John Holt, Company " K", 7th Infantry, were killed near the 
Snake Reservation. On Popoagie River, Wyoming, a detachment of 
Troop " D", 2nd Cavalry, under Lieutenant Stambaugh, had a fight in 
which two soldiers were killed. Two Indians were killed, ten wounded 
and one Indian pony captured. 

September 15th, near Whiskey Gap, Wyoming, a detachment of 
Company " B", 4th Infantry, under Lieutenant J. H. Spencer, had a fight 
with about three hundred Indians, -one soldier being captured and doubt 
less killed. 

September 17th, on Twin Creek, Wyoming, the United States mail 
escort had a fight with Indians. Near Fort Stanton, New Mexico, Indians 
ran off stock, were pursued, their village destroyed and three Indians 
wounded; no casualties to troops. 

At Point of Rocks, Wyoming, a stage was attacked and the driver 
killed. On Twin Creek, another escort party to the United States mail 
were attacked and driven into the mountains. 

September 20th, troops from Fort Bascorn, New Mexico, pursued a 
band of Indians to the mountains, where they escaped with loss of much 
of their plunder. 

September 23rd, troops from Fort Cummings, New Mexico, pursued 
marauding Indians, and after a long chase, recaptured thirty stolen 
horses. 

September 24th, Indians raided Mexican ranches near Fort Bayard, 
New Mexico. Troops followed the Indians to their village in the moun 
tains, destroyed it with its contents and wounded three Indians; no casu 
alties to the troops. 

September 26th, troops pursued a band of marauding Indians to their 
village in the San Francisco mountains, New Mexico, burned it, wounded 
two Indians and recovered some stolen sheep; no casualties to troops. The 
same day, on Prairie Dog Creek, Kansas, a column consisting of Troops 
"B", "C", "F", "L", and "M", 5th Cavalry, Troops "B", " C", and 
"M", 2nd Cavalry and two companies of Pawnee scouts, all under com 
mand of General Duncan, was about encamping after a long day's march, 
when the advance guard of twenty cavalrymen, commanded by Lieutenant 
Volkmar, 5th Cavalry, struck a band of Indians which attempted to cut 
off Major North and the chief scout and guide, William Cody. The 
detachment charged the Indians and pursued them to their village which 
was hastily abandoned. Some of the Pawnee "scouts joined in the 
chase, but night came on and the Indians escaped. One Indian was 
killed, one captured, and seven animals killed and captured, together 
with the entire village, consisting of fifty-six lodges which, with their 
contents, were destroyed on the following day. A portion of the column 
pursued for several days, but the Indians made no camp for ninety miles 
and the chase was abandoned. From an Indian prisoner it was ascer 
tained that the band were all Sioux, under "Pawnee Killer" and "Whistler",
both of whom had escaped from the Summit Springs fight on July 
llth. Some surveyor's instruments were also found in the Indian camp 
and identified as belonging to Mr. Nelson Buck's surveying party, 
consisting of about twelve persons, all of whom had been recently mur 
dered and their camp destroyed, not far from the scene of the fight of 
September 26th. The band had come from the north about three months 
before and had attacked another surveying party about twenty miles 
south of the Platte, on August 27th. In their flight from the village, the 
prisoner stated that the band, numbering a hundred warriors, besides 
women and children, had abandoned everything but their arms and ani 
mals, and had agreed not to stop until they reached the Sioux reserva 
tion north of the Platte. 

September 29th, Indians committed murders and depredations near 
Fort Bayard, New Mexico. Troops from the post pursued the Indians for 
a week, destroyed their village and contents, killed three and wounded 
three Indians and captured three horses. One soldier was wounded in 
the fight. 

October l0th, troops pursued a band of Indians to the Mogollon 
Mountains, New Mexico, and recaptured thirty stolen horses. 

October 23rd, troops pursued a band of Indians to the Miembres 
Mountains, New Mexico, where they overtook and defeated them, killing 
three, wounding three, and capturing three ponies and some supplies; 
one soldier was wounded. 

November 2nd, near Fort Sill, Indian Territory, troops recovered a 
white captive from a band of Indians. 

November 18th, Lieutenant H. B. Gushing, 3rd Cavalry, with a detachment
of Troop " F", after a pursuit of two hundred miles, had a fight with 
Indians in the Guadaloupe Mountains, New Mexico, in which two soldiers 
were wounded, the troops killing and wounding a number of Indians and 
recovering most of about one hundred and fifty head of stolen stock. 

December 2nd, near Horse-Shoe Creek, Wyoming, about one hundred 
and fifty Indians attacked the mail escort of ten men, under Sergeant 
Bahr, Company " E", 4th Infantry, proceeding from Fort Fetterman to 
Fort Laramie. One soldier was killed and several Indians reported 
killed and wounded. The same day and vicinity, the mail escort of 
ten men, en route from Fort Laramie to Fort Fetterman, was attacked 
and two men wounded. 

December 15th, Indians attacked Bunker Hill Station, Kansas, but 
were repulsed by the military guard. 

December 26th, in the Guadaloupe Mountains, New Mexico, a detach 
ment of Troop "F", 3rd Cavalry, commanded by Lieutenant Gushing, 
had a fight in which Lieutenant Franklin Yeaton, 3rd Cavalry, received 
severe wounds from the effects of which he afterwards died. The same 
detachment had another fight, 

December 30th, on Delaware Creek, New Mexico, no details of which 
are given. 