1876.
January 22nd, Lieutenant H. S. Bishop, with a detachment of seven 
teen men, Troop " G", 5th Cavalry, pursued a band of Indians which 
had been stealing stock near Camp Supply, Indian Territory, overtook 
the Indians on the Cimmaron River, killed three and captured four, 
together with thirty-five ponies and two mules. 

February 21st, Major Brisbin, 2nd Cavalry, with four troops 2nd Cav 
alry, a detachment of Company "C", 7th Infantry, a field-gun and fifteen 
citizens, numbering two hundred and twenty-one officers and men, left Fort 
Ellis, Montana, to march to the relief of a party of citizens, besieged by 
Indians, at the trading-post at Fort Pease, reaching there on March 4th. 
The original party had consisted of forty-six men who defended them 
selves desperately in a stockade, until the relief column of troops 
arrived. Six persons had been killed, eight wounded and thirteen had 
escaped, by night, only nineteen being found left in the stockade, and 
these were brought off by the troops. 

In Noyember, 1875, Indian Inspector E. C. Watkins, reported to the 
Commissioner of Indian Affairs, the attitude of certain wild and hostile 
bands of Indians, under the leadership of various chiefs or head-men, 
who were roaming about Dakota and Montana. 

Some of these bands had never accepted the reservation system, 
would not recognize the authority of the Government, and insisted upon 
remaining wild and perfectly free from control. Of this class was " Sit 
ting Bull", who was not a chief, but a " head-man", and whose imme 
diate following did not exceed thirty or forty lodges. 

Among the Indians referred to, were some who had not only attacked 
settlers and emigrants, but who had also been in the habit of making 
war upon the Mandans, Arickarees, and other tribes who were friendly 
to the whites. Inspector Watkins recommended, therefore, that troops 
should be sent into the country inhabited by these wild and roving 
bands, to punish and reduce them to subjection. His report, with the 
views of the Commissioner of Indian Affairs, together with the recom 
mendation of the Honorable Secretary of the Interior that these Indians 
be informed they must remove to 'reservations before January 31st, 1876, 
or in event of their failure to do so, by that date, that they would be 
turned over to the War Department, were all referred by the General 
of the Army to Lieutenant General Sheridan, December 13th, 1875. 
Another chief or head-man, against whom military operations were 
contemplated, was "Crazy-Horse", an Ogallala Sioux, properly belong 
ing to Red Cloud Agency, whose band comprised perhaps a hundred and 
twenty lodges, numbering about two hundred warriors. 

As Generals Terry and Crook commanded the Departments in which 
these Indians were located, the subject was submitted to them. 

General Terry's opinion was that Sitting Bull's band was encamped 
near the mouth of the Little Missouri, that it could be reached by a 
quick movement which might be decisive at that season of the year, and 
that he had sufficient troops to make such a movement. General Crook 
was of opinion that operations against the hostiles could be undertaken 
in his department whenever, in the opinion of the Indian Bureau, such 
action became necessary. 

On February 7th, by endorsement of the General of the Army upon 
a letter of the Honorable Secretary of the Interior, authority was 
received to commence operations against the hostiles. 

Meanwhile General Terry had learned that Sitting Bull's band was 
on the Dry Fork of the Missouri, some two hundred miles further west, 
instead of upon the Little Missouri, and on the 8th of February General 
Terry was directed to take such steps, with the forces under his com 
mand, as would carry out the wishes of the Interior Department and the 
orders of the General of the Army. General Terry was also informed 
that General Crook would operate from the south, in the direction of the 
headwaters of Powder River, Pumpkin Buttes, Tongue River, Rosebud 
and Big Horn Rivers, frequented by Crazy-Horse and his allies, and that 
the lines of the two military departments would be disregarded by the 
troops until the object requested by the Secretary of the Interior was 
attained. 

Similar directions were given General Crook, and, as the Indian vil 
lages were movable, no objective point could be fixed upon for concerted 
operations by the two distinct expeditions from the Departments of the 
Platte and Dakota. 

During the time these preparations were making, efforts were con 
tinued to have the Indians come in to their agencies, settle down and be 
peaceable, but without avail. 

Immediately upon receipt of his instructions, General Crook com 
menced concentrating at Fort Fetterman, the available cavalry of his 
command, consisting of about ten troops of the 2nd and 3rd Cavalry 
which, with two companies of infantry, moved out from that post March 
1st, in search of the hostiles, believed to be located on the headwaters of 
Powder River, Tongue River, or the Rosebud. 

March 17th, the main part of the expedition, under Colonel J. J. Rey 
nolds, 3rd Cavalry, consisting of Troops "A", "B", "E", "I", and "K", 
2nd Cavalry, with a detachment of Troop "A", and Troops "E", "F", 
and "M", 3rd Cavalry, attacked a large village of Sioux and Northern 
Cheyenries, near the mouth of Little Powder River, Montana, destroying 
all the lodges, one hundred and five in number, with ammunition and 
stores. A large herd of animals was also captured, but were subse 
quently recovered by the hostiles. Four enlisted men were killed and 
Lieutenant Rawolle, 2nd Cavalry, and five men wounded. The village 
was a perfect magazine of ammunition, war material and general sup 
plies, and every evidence was found to prove these Indians in co-part 
nership with those at the Red Cloud and Spotted Tail Agencies, that 
the proceeds of raids upon the settlements had been taken into those 
agencies and supplies brought out in return. 

The command had suffered so much from the severity of the weather, 
the mercurial thermometer failing to register the intensity of the cold, 
that after the destruction of the village, the column returned to Fort 
Fetterman and the troops were distributed to their various winter stations 
for shelter. 

About the same time that General Crook was preparing to move, as 
described, General Terry projected an expedition against Sitting Bull's 
band, but before the 7th Cavalry could be fully concentrated at Fort A. 
Lincoln, for the purpose, the season became so inclement that it was 
thought advisable to postpone the expedition until later, the snow being 
so deep and the number of men badly frozen, so great. The impractica 
bility of operating from the Missouri River against the Sioux, during the 
winter and spring, owing to the wild storms of Dakota, was fully proven 
and rendered more than ever apparent the necessity for the large military 
posts at the mouth of the Tongue River and on the Big Horn, already 
repeatedly recommended in anticipation of hostilities with the Sioux. 

April 28th, near Grace Creek, Nebraska, a mounted detachment of 
nine men of Company " A", 23rd Infantry, commanded by Lieutenant C. 
H. Heyl, had a fight with a band of Indians, killing one Indian and 
wounding several others. The Sergeant of the detachment was killed 
upon charging the Indians strongly posted on a hill. 

No change having been made in the orders already described, early 
in the spring Generals Terry and Crook prepared to resume the opera 
tions discontinued previously on account of the severity of the weather. 
At Fort Fetterman, Wyoming, General Crook concentrated Troops " A", 
"B", "D", "E", and "I", 2nd Cavalry, Troops "A", "B", "C", "D", 
"E", "F", "H", "I", "L", and "M", 3rd Cavalry, Companies "D", and 
"F", 4th Infantry, and Companies "C", "G", and "H", 9th Infantry. 

On May 29th, this column under the personal command of General 
Crook, left Fort Fetterman for Goose Creek, where a supply camp was 
established on June 8th. From this point General Crook moved out, 
June 13th, and on June 17th, Indians were discovered in large numbers 
on the Rosebud. General Crook's command of less than a thousand men 
was attacked with desperation, the light lasting for several hours, when 
the Indians were driven several miles in confusion, a great many being 
killed and wounded in the retreat, though the extent of their losses 
could not be ascertained. Eleven dead Indians were found upon the 
field. The casualties to the troops were nine men killed, and fifteen 
wounded of the 3rd Cavalry, two men wounded of the 2nd Cavalry, and 
three men of the 4th Infantry wounded, besides Captain G. V. Henry, 
3rd Cavalry, severely wounded. The scene of the attack was at the 
mouth of a deep and rocky caiion with steep, timbered sides, so at night 
fall, encumbered with wounded and the troops without anything but 
what each man carried for himself, General Crook deemed it best to 
return to his supply camp, to await reinforcements and supplies, not con 
sidering it advisable to make another forward movement until additional 
troops reached him. From the strength of the hostiles who" boldly attacked 
this large column, it now became apparent that not only Crazy Horse 
and his small band had to be fought, but that the hostiles had been 
reinforced by large numbers of warriors from the agencies along the Mis 
souri and from the Red Cloud and Spotted Tail Agencies, located near 
the boundary line between Dakota and Nebraska; the Indian Agents, 
if aware of them, having failed to inform the military of these wholesale 
departures. Such a movement from these agencies had been feared and 
in May authority had been asked allowing the military to exercise 
supervising control over these agencies, so as to keep in all who were 
present and keep out those who were then away and hostile, but this 
was not granted. 

Simultaneously with these operations in the Department of the 
Platte, General Terry had concentrated at Fort A. Lincoln the entire 
7th Cavalry, three Gatling guns, and six companies of infantry. On 
May 17th, he marched from that post with his column, numbering about 
nine hundred men, for the mouth of Powder River, where he established 
his supply camp on the 7th of June. From this point Major Reno, with 
six troops of the 7th Cavalry, scouted up the Powder River to its forks, 
across the country to the Rosebud and down the last named stream to 
its mouth. At the same time General Terry moved with his main force 
up the south bank of the Yellowstone River and formed a junction with 
a column under Colonel John Gibbon, consisting of four troops of the 
2nd Cavalry and six companies of the 7th Infantry, which had marched 
eastward along the north bank of the Yellowstone from Fort Ellis, Mon 
tana. During Major Reno's scout, a large Indian trail was discovered 
along the Rosebud, but as Reno's orders did not contemplate an attack 
with his small force, the trail was only followed a sufficient distance to 
definitely locate the Indians in the vicinity of the Little Big Horn River, 
after which Reno returned to the mouth of the Rosebud. 

General Terry was now satisfied as to the location of the Indians, and 
at a conference between himself, Colonels Gibbon and Ouster, on June 
21st, he communicated the following plan of operations : Gibbon's col 
umn was to cross the Yellowstone, near the mouth of the Big Horn, 
march for the mouth of the Little Big Horn and thence up the latter, 
with the understanding that it would arrive at the last named point by 
June 26th : Ouster, with the whole of the 7th Cavalry, should proceed 
up the Rosebud until he ascertained the direction taken by the trail 
found by Reno; if this led to the Little Big Horn, it should not be fol 
lowed, but Ouster should keep still further to the south, before turning 
toward that river, in order to intercept the Indians, should they attempt 
to slip between him and the mountains, and also in order, by a longer 
march, to give time for Colonel Gibbon's column to come up. 

This plan was founded upon the belief that, at some point on the 
Little Big Horn, a body of hostiles would be found, though it was im 
possible to arrange movements in perfect concert, as might be done were 
there a known fixed objective point. It was believed impracticable to 
unite both Gibbon's and Ouster's forces, because more than half of those 
of Gibbon were infantry, who could not keep up with the rapid move 
ment of cavalry; whilst taking away the mounted troops from Gibbon, to 
unite with those of Ouster, would leave Gibbon's infantry too weak a 
force to act independently. 

Under directions, then, to carry, out his part of the foregoing plan, 
to also examine the upper part of Tullock's Fork and endeavor to send a 
scout through with the information thus obtained, to Gibbon's column, 
which was to examine the lower- part of that fork, Ouster started up the 
Rosebud on June 22nd, and Gibbon's command, personally accompanied 
by General Terry, moved the same day for the mouth of the Big Horn. 
A supply steamer was to push up the Big Horn as far as the forks, if 
found navigable for that distance, and Custer, at the expiration of the 
time for which his troops were rationed, was to report to General Terry 
there, unless in the meantime other orders should be received. 

In accordance with this plan, all of Gibbon's column reached and 
crossed Tullock's Creek, on the afternoon of June 24th. 

On the afternoon of June 22nd, Ouster's column marched up the Rose 
bud twelve miles and there encamped. The next day, June 23rd, he 
continued up the Rosebud thirty-three miles, passing a heavy lodge pole 
trail, though not very fresh. June 24th, the advance was continued up 
the Rosebud, the trail and signs constantly growing fresher, until the 
column had marched twenty-eight miles, when camp was made. At 
eleven o'clock that night, the column was again put in motion, turning 
from the Rosebud to the right up one of its branches which headed near 
the summit of the " divide " between the Rosebud and the Little Big 
Horn. About two o'clock in the morning of June 25th, the column 
halted for about three hours, made coffee and then resumed the march, 
crossed the divide, and by eight o'clock were in the valley of one of the 
branches of the Little Big Horn. By this time Indians had been seen, 
and as it was certain they could not now be surprised, it was determined 
to attack them. 

Custer took personal command of Troops "C", "E", "F", "I", and 
"L"; Major Reno was given Troops "A", "G", and "M"; Captain 
Benteen, Troops "H", "D", and "K"; Captain McDougall with Troop 
"B", acted as guard to the pack train. 

The valley of the creek was followed towards the Little Big Horn, 
Custer on the right of the creek, Reno on the left of it, Benteen off still 
further to the left and not in sight. About eleven o'clock Reno's troops 
crossed the creek to Custer's column and remained with them until about 
half-past twelve o'clock, when it was reported that the village was only 
two miles ahead and running away. 

Reno was now directed to move forward, at as rapid a gait as he 
thought prudent, and to charge, with the understanding Custer would 
support him. The troops under Reno moved at a fast trot for about two 
miles, when they came to the river, crossed it, halted a few minutes to 
collect the men and then deployed. A charge was made down the river, 
driving the Indians rapidly for about two miles and a half, until near the 
village which was still there. Not seeing anything, however, of the sub 
divisions under Custer and Benteen, and the Indians swarming upon him 
from all directions, Reno took position, dismounted, in the edge of some 
timber which afforded shelter for the horses of his command, continuing 
the fight on foot until it became apparent he would soon be overcome by 
the superior numbers of the Indians. He then mounted his troops, charged 
through the Indians, re-crossed the river and gained the bluffs upon the 
opposite side. In this charge, First Lieutenant Donald Mclntosh and 
Second Lieutenant Benjamin H. Hodgson, 7th Cavalry, with Acting 
Assistant Surgeon J. M. DeWolf, were killed. 

Reno's force succeeded in reaching the top of the bluff, but with a 
loss of three officers and twenty-nine enlisted men killed, and seven men 
wounded. Almost at the same time Reno's troops reached these bluffs, 
Benteen's battalion came up and a little later, the pack train, with 
McDougall's troop escorting it. These three detachments were all 
united under Reno's command and numbered about three hundred and 
eighty-one men, in addition to their officers. 

Meanwhile nothing had been heard from Custer, so the re-united 
detachments under Reno moved down the river, keeping along the bluffs 
on the opposite side from the village. Firing had been heard from that 
direction, but after moving to the highest point without seeing or hear 
ing anything of Custer, Reno sent Captain Weir with his troop to try to 
open communication with the former. Weir soon sent back word that he 
could go no further and that the Indians were getting around him, at the 
same time keeping up a heavy fire from his skirmish line. Reno then 
turned everything back to the first position he had taken on the bluff, 
which seemed the best for a defence, had the horses and mules driven 
into a depression, put his men, dismounted, on the crests of the hills 
making the depression, and had hardly completed these dispositions when 
the Indians attacked him furiously. 

This was now about six o'clock in the evening and the ground was 
held with a further loss of eighteen killed and forty-six wounded, until 
the attack ceased about nine o'clock at night. 

By this time the overwhelming numbers of the enemy rendered it 
improbable that the troops under Ouster could undertake to rejoin those 
with Reno, so the latter began to dig rifle-pits, barricaded with dead 
horses and mules and boxes from the packs, to prepare for any further 
attack which might be made the next day. All night long the men kept 
working, while the Indians were holding a scalp dance, within their hear 
ing, in the valley of the Little Horn below. 

About half-past two o'clock in the morning, of June 26th, a most 
terrific rifle-fire was opened upon Reno's position and, as daylight 
increased, hordes of Indians were seen taking station upon high points 
completely surrounding the troops, so that men were struck on opposite 
sides of the lines from where the shots were fired. The fire did not 
slacken until half-past nine o'clock in the morning, when the Indians 
made a desperate charge upon the line held by Troops " H", and " M", 
coming to such -close quarters as to touch with a " coup-stick", a man 
lying dead within the lines. This onslaught was repulsed by a charge 
from the line assaulted, led by Colonel Benteen. 

The Indians also charged close enough to send their arrows' into the 
line held by Troops " D", and " K", but they were driven back by a 
counter-charge of those troops, accompanied in person by Reno. 

There were now many wounded and the question of obtaining water 
was a vital one, for the troops had been without any from six o'clock the 
previous evening, a period of about sixteen hours. A skirmish line was 
formed under Benteen, to protect the descent of volunteers down the 
hill in front of the position to reach the water. A little was obtained in 
canteens, but many of the men were struck in securing the precious 
fluid. 

The fury of the attack was now over and the Indians were seen 
going off in parties to the village. Two solutions occurred, either that 
the Indians were going for something to eat and more ammunition, as 
they had been shooting arrows, or else that -Ouster was coming. Advan 
tage was taken of this lull to rush down to the stream and fill all vessels 
possible with water, but the Indians continued to withdraw and firing 
ceased, excepting occasional shots from sharp-shooters sent to annoy the 
soldiers near the water. About two o'clock in the afternoon, the grass 
in the bottom was extensively fired by the Indians, and behind the 
dense smoke thus created, the Indian village began to move away. 

Between six and seven o'clock in the evening, the village came out 
from behind this cloud of smoke and dust, the troops obtaining a full 
view of the cavalcade, as it filed away in the direction of the Big Horn 
Mountains, moving in almost full military order. 

All thoughts were now turned again towards Ouster, of whom nothing 
had been seen or heard since he gave his orders on the previous day for 
the first advance by the detachments under Reno and Benteen, and 
which orders contemplated the support of these by the force retained 
under Ouster's personal command. No one dreamed of the real explana 
tion of Ouster's absence, and the impression was that this heavy force of 
Indians had gotten between him and the rest, forcing him towards the 
mouth of the Little Big Horn, from which direction the column under 
Gibbon, with General Terry, was expected. 

During the night of June 26th, the troops under Reno changed posi 
tion so as to better secure a supply of water and to prepare against 
another assault, should the warriors return in strong force, but early in 
the morning of the 27th, while preparing to resist any attack which 
might be attempted, the dust of a moving column was seen approaching 
in the distance. Soon it was discovered to be troops who where coming 
and in a little while a scout arrived with a note from General Terry to 
Ouster, saying that some Crow scouts had come to camp stating that 
Ouster had been whipped, but that their story was not believed. About 
half-past ten o'clock in the morning General Terry rode into Reno's lines 
and the fate of Ouster was ascertained. 

Precisely what was done by Ouster's immediate command, subsequent 
to the moment when the rest of the regiment last saw them alive, has 
remained partly a matter of conjecture, no officer or soldier who rode 
with him into the valley of the Little Big Horn, having lived to tell the 
tale. The only real evidence of how they came to meet their fate, was 
the testimony of the field where it overtook them. What was read upon 
the ground, as from an open page, was described in the official report of 
General Terry who came up -with Gibbon's column. 

Ouster's trail, from the point where Reno crossed the stream, passed 
along and in rear of the crest of the bluffs on the right bank, for nearly 
or quite three miles. Then it came down to the bank of the river, but 
at once diverged from it again, as though Ouster had unsuccessfully 
attempted to cross; then turning upon itself and almost completing a 
circle, the trail ceased. It was marked by the remains of officers and 
men and the bodies of horses, some of them dotted along the path, others 
heaped in ravines and upon knolls where halts appeared to have been 
made. There was abundant evidence that a gallant resistance had been 
offered by Ouster's troops, but that they were beset on all sides by over 
powering numbers. 

The officers known to be killed were General Ouster, Captains 
Keogh, Yates and Ouster, Lieutenants Oooke, Smith, Mclntosh, Calhoun, 
Porter, Hodgson, Sturgis and Reilly, of the 7th Cavalry, Lieutenant 
Crittenden of the 20th Infantry, and Acting Assistant Surgeon DeWolf; 
Lieutenant Harrington of the cavalry and Assistant Surgeon Lord were 
missing. Mr. Boston Custer, a brother, and Mr. Reed, a nephew of Gen 
eral Ouster, were with him and were killed. Captain Benteen and 
Lieutenant Varnum of the cavalry and fifty-one men were wounded. 

Following up the movements of Gibbon's column from the Yellow 
stone, starting from Tullock's Creek soon after five o'clock on the morn 
ing of June 25th, the infantry of Gibbon's command made a march of 
twenty-two miles over a most difficult country. In order that scouts 
might be sent into the valley of the Little Big Horn, Gibbon's cavalry, 
with the battery, was then pushed on thirteen or fourteen miles further, 
not camping until midnight. Scouts were sent out at half-past four in 
the morning of June 26th; they soon discovered three Indians who were 
at first supposed to be Sioux, but when overtaken they proved to be Crows 
who had been with General Custer. They brought to General Terry the 
first intelligence of the battle. Their story was not credited; it was sup 
posed that some fighting, perhaps severe fighting, had taken place, but 
it was not believed that disaster could have overtaken so large a force 
as twelve companies of cavalry. The infantry which had broken camp 
very early, soon came up and the whole column entered and moved up 
the valley of the Little Big Horn. 

During the afternoon efforts were made to send scouts through to 
what was supposed to be Ouster's position, to obtain information of the 
condition of affairs, but those who were sent out were driven back by 
parties of Indians who, in increasing numbers, were seen hovering in 
front of Gibbon's column. At twenty minutes before nine o'clock in the 
evening, the infantry had marched between twenty-nine and thirty 
miles, the men were very weary and daylight was fading. The column 
was therefore halted for the night at a point about eleven miles in a 
straight line above the mouth of the stream. 

On the morning of June 27th the advance was resumed and, after a 
march of nine miles, the intrenched position was reached, the with 
drawal of the Indians from around Reno's command and from the valley 
of the Little Big Horn being undoubtedly caused by the approach of 
Gibbon's troops. 

Major Reno and Captain Benteen, both of whom were officers of 
experience, accustomed to seeing large bodies of mounted men, esti 
mated the number of Indians engaged at not less than twenty-five hun 
dred; other officers thought that the number was greater than this; the 
village in the valley was about three miles in length and almost a mile 
in width. Besides the regular lodges quantities of temporary brushwood 
structures were found, indicating that many besides the proper inhabit 
ants of the village had gathered there. 

Crazy Horse and Sitting Bull, with their respective adherents, were 
both at the battle of the Little Big Horn, and for a time, Sitting Bull 
was credited with an importance which did not belong to him, his 
own direct following being comparatively small. Afterwards a separa 
tion took place between Crazy Horse and Sitting Bull, and the latter 
was, on several occasions, fought by the troops north of the Yellowstone. 

During the afternoon and evening of June 27th, the wounded were 
moved to the camp of General Terry, and at five o'clock in the morning 
on the 28frh, Reno's command proceeded to the battle-ground of Custer 
and buried two hundred and four bodies there. 

The 28th of June was passed in making horse and hand litters for 
the wounded, so as to move them down to the mouth of the Little 
Big Horn, a transfer which occupied several days, for the marches had 
to be short. The same day a reconnoissance was made by Captain Ball 
of the 2nd Cavalry, along the trail of the Indians when they left the val 
ley of the Little Big Horn. He reported that they divided into two par 
ties, one of which kept the valley of Long Fork, making, he thought for 
the Big Horn Mountains; the other turned more to the eastward. He 
also discovered leading into the valley, a very heavy trail, not more than 
five days old. This was entirely distinct from the one Custer had fol 
lowed and indicated that at least two bands had united just before the 
battle. 

In the evening of June 28th General Terry began moving the 
wounded but was able to proceed only four miles, on account of the 
insufficient number of litters. The 29th was spent in making a full sup 
ply of them, and in the evening of that day the column started again, 
the wounded being placed on the steamer "Far West", at the mouth of 
the Little Big Horn, at two o'clock in the morning of June 30th, reach 
ing the depot on the Yellowstone the same afternoon. The steamer then 
proceeded with them to Fort A. Lincoln, the main command reaching 
the Yellowstone and camping on the bank of the river on the 2nd of July. 

Attempts were immediately made by General Terry to communi 
cate with General Crook, who was somewhere in that part of the coun 
try, in order that concert of action might be established between the 
two expeditions. Two attempts failed, but a third succeeded; three 
private soldiers of the 7th Infantry, James Bell, William Evans and 
Benjamin H. Stewart, carried a dispatch through to General Crook arid 
two of them returned with his reply. 

As soon as the news of this disaster was received at Division Head 
quarters, additional troops were at once put in motion for General 
Terry's command, as had already been done for that of General Crook, 
but these re-inforcements had to be collected from various stations on 
the frontier, some of them very remote from railroads, and much time 
was consumed before reaching their destinations. 

During this period, the bands which had broken off from the main 
body of hostiles, and the young warriors from the agencies, continued 
their old well-known methods of warfare, stealing horses on the frontier 
and killing small parties of citizens, while the constant communications 
of the hostiles with Indians at the agencies, macle it evident that sup 
plies of food and ammunition were still being drawn from those places. 

To prevent this, it had been deemed necessary that the military should 
control the agencies, and on May #9th the Interior Department had been 
requested to so co-operate with the military as to enable the* latter to 
carry out the policy of arresting, disarming and dismounting such of the 
hostiles as made their appearance at these agencies. On July 18th this 
request was again earnestly renewed by Lieutenant General Sheridan, 
and on the 22nd the Honorable Secretary of the Interior authorized the 
military to assume control* of all the agencies in the Sioux country, but 
it was too late; extensive trading with the enemy had been going on, 
and large supplies of ammunition had thus been obtained by the hostiles 
to carry on the war. However, the commanding officers at Camps Robin 
son and Sheridan were at once ordered to take possession at Red Cloud's 
and Spotted Tail's Agencies, and Colonel Mackenzie, 4th Cavalry, was 
sent to Red Cloud Agency, with a force to arrest any hostiles who 
came in and to count and enroll the Indians. A careful count was made 
by September 1st, and it was found that those at Red Cloud numbered 
only four thousand seven hundred and sixty, nearly one half less than 
had been reported by the Agent. The count at Spotted Tail's Agency 
developed less than five thousand, whereas nearly double that number 
were presumed to be present at their agency and were ostensibly issued to* 
Troops were also ,sent to the Missouri River Agencies to accomplish 
these same purposes, and the number of Indians actually present was 
found to be from one-third to one-half less than reported present for 
issues. It was then easy to see where the small bands originally out, 
and upon whom the war was being waged, obtained their strength and 
supplies. 

At last, on July 22nd Congress having passed a bill authorizing the 
construction of the two posts in the Yellowstone country, recommended 
long before this war began, preparations were made to begin them at 
once and all the material was prepared as rapidly as possible, but the 
season had now become so far advanced that it was found impracticable 
to get the supplies up the Yellowstone River, on account of low water, 
so the building of the posts had to be deferred until the following spring. 
However, a temporary cantonment was ordered to be immediately constructed
at the mouth of Tongue River, the place selected for one of the 
permanent posts, (now Fort Keogh,) and a strong garrison, under the 
command of Colonel Miles, oth Infantry, was detailed to occupy it. 

July 7th, Lieutenant F. W. Sibley, 2nd Cavalry, commanding a detach 
ment of twenty-five men, with several citizens, was sent by General 
Crook to make a reconnoissance, and when near where the Little Big 
Horn River emerges from the Big Horn Mountains, encountered a very 
large force of Indians who nearly succeeded in capturing the entire 
detachment. By great coolness, abandoning all their horses, after a very 
gallant fight, Lieutenant Sibley's party succeeded in escaping from the 
Indians and on foot made their way over a most broken country to Gen 
eral Crook's camp, where they arrived safely, in an almost exhausted 
condition. 

July 17th, information having been received of a movement of the 
Indians at Red Cloud's Agency to join the hostiles north of them, Col 
onel Merritt with Troops "A", "B", "D", "G", "I", "K", and "M", 
5th Cavalry, by a rapid march succeeded in intercepting a band of about 
eight hundred Indians near Hat Creek, Wyoming, surprised them, killed 
one Indian, wounded one and chased the entire band back to the Red 
Cloud Agency. 

July 30th, Lieutenant J. L. Bullis, 24th Infantry, with a detachment 
of forty men, struck a camp of hostile Lipans and Kickapoos, near 
Saragossa, Mexico, killed ten and captured four Indians with about one 
hundred horses. 

August #d, near the mouth of the Rosebud, Montana, Major O. H. 
Moore with four officers aud two companies of the 6th Infantry and one 
company of the 17th Infantry, had a fight in which one white scout and 
one Indian wrere killed. 

August 14th, a steamer carrying troops and government supplies, was 
fired upon by Indians near Fort Buford, Dakota; the troops returned the 
fire and the Indians fled: no casualties occurred. 

August 23rd, Lieutenant Bronson, with Company " G", 6th Infantry, 
had a fight with Indians on the Yellowstone River, Montana: one enlisted 
man was wounded. 

General Crook having received re-inforcements and having learned 
that the hostiles had now moved eastward from the Big Horn Mountains, 
marched with his column, on the 5th of August, down the Tongue River 
in pursuit. He followed the trail across Powder River and some distance 
east, when it separated and became indistinct, part of it going towards 
the Black Hills and the agencies. He then marched his command south 
ward, in the direction of the Black Hills, and on 

September 9th, a battalion consisting of one hundred and fifty men 
of the 3rd Cavalry, under Captain Anson Mills, after a very trying night- 
march, succeeded at day-break in surprising the village of "American 
Horse", at Slim Buttes, Dakota, capturing the entire village of about 
thirty-seven lodges, with quantities of supplies, arms and ammunition, and 
about one hundred and seventy-five ponies. Among the articles taken 
from this village, were a guidon of the 7th Cavalry, a pair of gloves 
marked with the name of Colonel Keogh, 7th Cavalry, who was killed 
with Caster, and many other things which were recognized as belonging 
to that command. The battalion of Captain Mills suffered a loss of one 
enlisted man killed, six wounded, and Lieutenant A. H. Von Luettwitz, 
3rd Cavalry, so seriously wounded in the leg as to require amputation. 
The loss of the Indians was "American Horse", mortally wounded, 
four Indians killed and about a dozen captured. The village of Crazy 
Horse was only a short distance away, and after the first flight from 
camp, the Indians returned in increased numbers and attacked Mills' 
command, but the main column of General Crook having arrived, the 
Indians were worsted in several encounters which took place, a force 
under Lieutenant Colonel W. B. Royall, 3rd Cavalry, consisting of 
battalions of the 2nd and 3rd Cavalry, having one man wounded. The 
Indians continued hovering around the command, taking positions in 
ravines from which they had to be dislodged, with much patience and 
exposure to the troops. In the several fights which occurred, the 5th 
Cavalry, under General Carr, lost one enlisted man and one white scout 
killed, and five enlisted men wounded, the loss inflicted by his force upon 
the Indians being estimated at seven or eight killed. Major Chambers, 
4th Infantry, with the infantry battalion, consisting of three companies 
of the 4th Infantry, three of the 9th Infantry and four of the 14th Infan 
try, drove off from the bluffs parties of Indians who were firing into the 
camp of the command, one enlisted man of the 9th Infantry being 
severely wounded in these operations. 

On September l#th, Major Upham, with one hundred and fifty men 
of the 5th Cavalry, was sent by General Crook to follow a trail leading 
down Owl Creek, but returned on the 14th without having found any 
village. One private soldier of his command was killed by Indians on 
the Belle Fourche. 

During the later operations of General Crook's column, the troops, 
being without tents, suffered not only from the incessant cold rains pre 
vailing, but were wholly without regular food. Having met with General 
Terry's column, the latter had shared its supplies with General Crook, 
but these became exhausted and for days General Crook's troops were 
obliged to subsist principally upon horse flesh. The animals of the cav 
alry were so worn out by hard marching, want of forage and exposure 
to constant storms, that General Crook's column moved to Custer City 
and there obtained supplies. 

September 15th, Captain Henry Carroll, with Troop " F", 9th Cav 
alry, had a fight with a party of Indians in the Florida Mountains, New
Mexico, killed one Indian and captured eleven head of stock: one
enlisted man was wounded. 

October 10th, Captain C. W. Miner, 22nd Infantry, with Companies 
"H",uG",and " K", 22nd Infantry, and Company « C", 17th Infantry, 
escorting a train of ninety-four wagons, started from the camp at mouth 
of Glendive Creek, Montana, for the cantonment at mouth of Tongue 
River. The train was attacked in its camp that night, by Indians esti 
mated at from four to six hundred, several of the animals wounded and 
forty-seven mules stampeded and captured. In this crippled condition 
the train attempted to reach Clear Creek, eight miles further on, being 
constantly harassed by the hostiles in large force, but finding it impos 
sible to continue, returned to Glendive Creek for reinforcements. 

The teamsters having become too demoralized to proceed, forty-one 
of them were discharged and soldiers were detailed to drive. The 
escort, now consisting of five companies of infantry, numbering eleven 
officers and one hundred and eighty-five men, under command of Lieu 
tenant Colonel E. S. Otis, 22nd Infantry, again attempted to carry these 
much needed supplies to the garrison at Tongue River. 

October 15th, on Spring Creek the Indians, increased to an estimated 
strength of from seven to eight hundred warriors, again attacked the 
train which, however, formed in compact lines, pressed on, the infantry 
escort charging the Indians repeatedly and driving them back, while the 
wagons slowly advanced. Three or four scouts from Colonel Miles' com 
mand were met here, having been attacked by Indians and one of their 
party killed. The train proceeded, with the escort skirmishing, until 
Clear Creek was reached, the point from which Captain Miner had pre 
viously been obliged to return. Here the Indians made the most deter 
mined attack, firing the prairie and the wagons being obliged to advance 
through the flames. Compactly arranged in four lines, the wagons pro 
ceeded, the entire escort being engaged in alternately charging the 
Indians, driving them back and then regaining the moving teams; three 
or four of the escort were wounded and a considerable number of Indian 
saddles emptied. 

On October 16th, whilst advancing, an Indian runner approached and 
left upon a hill the following communication : 

"YELLOWSTONE: 

I want to know what you are doing traveling on this road. You 
scare all the buffalo away. I want to hunt in this place. I want you to 
turn back from here. If you don't I will fight you again. I want you 
to leave what you have got here and turn back from here. 

I am your friend, 

SITTING BULL. 

I mean all the rations you have got and some powder. Wish you 
would write as soon as you can." 

Colonel Otis sent out a scout, named Jackson, with a reply to Sitting 
Bull's note, stating that he intended to take the train through to Tongue 
River and would be pleased to accommodate the Indians with a fight at 
any time. 

The train proceeded, the Indians surrounding it and keeping up firing 
at long range. After proceeding a short distance, two Indians appeared 
with a flag of truce and communication was again opened with the hostiles 
who stated they were hungry, tired of the war and wanted to make peace. 
Sitting Bull wanted to meet Colonel Otis outside of the lines of the 
escort, which invitation, however, Colonel Otis declined, though pro 
fessing a willingness to meet Sitting Bull inside the lines of the troops. 
This the wary savage was afraid to do, but sent three chiefs to represent 
him. Colonel Otis made them a present of one hundred and fifty pounds 
of hard bread and two sides of bacon, said that he had no authority to 
treat with them, but that the Indians could go to Tongue River and there 
make known their wishes regarding surrender. The train moved on and 
the Indians fell to its rear, finally disappearing altogether. 

On the night of the 18th of October Colonel Otis met Colonel Miles, 
with his entire regiment who, alarmed for safety of the train, had 
advanced to meet it. Colonel Otis succeeded in reaching Tongue River, 
delivered his supplies and returned safely with his wagons to Glendive, 
on October 26th. 

Shortly after meeting Colonel Otis and learning from him the imme 
diate situation, Colonel Miles, with the entire 5th Infantry, started after 
Sitting Bull, overtaking him near Cedar Creek, Montana, north of the 
Yellowstone. Colonel Miles met Sitting Bull between the lines of the 
troops and of the Indians, the latter having sent a flag of truce to Miles, 
desiring to communicate. 

Sitting Bull simply desired to hunt buffalo and trade for ammunition; 
he would agree that the Indians should not fire on the soldiers, if
unmolested; in short, he wanted simply "an old-fashioned peace" for the 
winter. He was informed of the terms of the government, told how he 
could have peace and that he must bring in his tribe to near the camp of 
the troops. The interview closed unsatisfactorily and Colonel Miles' 
column, numbering three hundred and ninety-eight rifles, moved and 
camped on Cedar Creek, so as to intercept, more easily, the movement of 
the Indians which was northward, Sitting Bull being told to come again 
next day. 

Whilst the command was moving north between the Indian camp and 
the Big Dry River, the Indians again appeared and desired to talk. 
Another council followed between the lines, October 21st, Sitting Bull 
and a number of principal men being present. Sitting Bull wanted 
peace, if he could have it upon his own terms. He was told the condi 
tions of the government, which were that he should either camp his people
at some point on the Yellowstone River, near to the troops, or go 
into some agency and place his people under subjection to the govern 
ment. He said he would come in to trade for ammunition, but wanted 
no rations or annuities and desired to live free, as an Indian. He gave 
no assurance of good faith and, as the council broke up, he was told that 
a non-acceptance of the terms of the government would be considered an 
act of hostility. The Indians took positions instantly for a fight and an 
engagement followed, the Indians being driven from every part of the 
field, through their camp ground, down Bad Route Creek and pursued 
forty-two miles to the south side of the Yellowstone. In their retreat 
they abandoned tons of dried meat, quantities of lodge poles, camp equip 
age, ponies and broken down cavalry horses. Five dead warriors were 
left on the field, besides those they were seen to carry away. Their force 
was estimated at upwards of one thousand warriors. 

On October 27th, over four hundred lodges of Indians, numbering 
about two thousand men, 'women and children, surrendered to Colonel 
Miles; five chiefs giving themselves up as hostages for the delivery of 
men, women, children, ponies, arms and ammunition at the agencies; 
Sitting Bull himself escaped northward with his own small band, and 
was joined later by " Gall" and other chiefs with their followers. Having 
returned to Tongue River Cantonment, Colonel Miles organized a force 
numbering four hundred and thirty-four rifles and moved north in pur 
suit of Sitting Bull, but the trail was obliterated by the snow, in the 
vicinity of the Big Dry River. A band of one hundred and nineteen 
lodges under "Iron Dog" crossed the Missouri in advance of the com 
mand and dissolved itself in the Yanktonnais camp, Sitting Bull conti 
nuing to hover about the neighborhood of the Missouri River and its 
branches, for some time afterwards. 

October 14th, a detachment of Troop "K", 2nd Cavalry was reported 
as having a fight on Richard Creek, Wyoming, one soldier being killed. 

General Crook, having learned that there was danger of a considera 
ble number of Indians at Red Cloud Agency again attempting to join the 
hostiles, directed a strong force, from his column, to proceed to that 
agency, under command of Colonel Merritt, 5th Cavalry, for the purpose 
of disarming and dismounting the bands from which trouble was expected. 
Before Colonel Merritt could reach there, however, affairs had 'assumed 
such a threatening aspect that it was determined to arrest and disarm the 
Indians, with such force as was at hand. Accordingly Colonel Macken 
zie, 4th Cavalry, with eight troops of cavalry, on 

October 22nd succeeded, at night, in surrounding and surprising Red 
Cloud's and Red Leaf's bands, so that when daylight dawned on the 23rd, 
the Indians surrendered without firing a shot. The Indians, numbering 
about four hundred warriors, were at once disarmed and, followed by 
their families, with camp equipage and property, were brought into the
agency, where they were released and put into camp. About seven hun 
dred ponies were captured, together with all the arms and ammunition 
the Indians had about their persons and in the lodges. 

General Crook then had a council with Spotted Tail and, satisfied that 
the latter intended to be loyal to the government, placed this Indian in 
charge of all the Indians at both Red Cloud and Spotted Tail Agencies, 
deposing Red Cloud, the conduct of whose followers had given evidence 
of anything but proper intentions. These Indians were the same who 
had killed a large part of the garrison of Fort Phil Kearney, in 1866, and 
who had, in 1874, threatened to massacre the people at Red Cloud 
Agency, because they attempted to hoist the United States flag over it. 

The troops composing what had been known as the "Big Horn Expe 
dition", under General Crook, having been distributed to their stations 
for the winter, another column, known as the "Powder River Expedition", 
was organized and left Fort Fetterman November 15th, 1876. It consisted
of Troop "K", 2nd Cavalry, "H", and "K", 3rd Cavalry, "B", "D", 
"E", "F", and "M", 4th Cavalry and " H", and "L", 5th Cavalry, the 
cavalry being all commanded by Colonel R. S. Mackenzie, 4th Cavalry. 
The infantry and artillery, commanded by Lieutenant Colonel R. I. 
Dodge, 23rd Infantry, consisted of Companies "A", "B", "D", "F", "I", 
and "K", 9th Infantry, "D", and "G", 14th Infantry, "C", "G", and 
"I", 23rd Infantry and "C", "F", "H", and "K", 4th Artillery. A can 
tonment was established near old Fort Reno, Wyoming, and the cavalry 
was sent out, under Colonel Mackenzie, to find and strike a large village 
which had been reported. 

At noon on November 24th, while marching toward the Sioux Pass of 
the Big Horn Mountains, Mackenzie's Indian scouts reported the camp 
of the enemy about twenty miles distant, near the north fork of Powder 
River. The command halted till sunset, intending, by a night march, to 
surprise the Indians at daybreak, and soon after that hour on the 25th, 
almost a complete surprise was effected. The only practicable approach 
to the village was at the lower end and the Indians took refuge in a net 
work of very deep ravines beyond the upper end of the camp, leaving on 
foot and taking nothing but their arms with them. A brisk fight for 
about an hour ensued, after which skirmishing was kept up until night. 
The village, consisting of one hundred and seventy-three lodges, with 
their contents, was entirely destroyed and about five hundred ponies were 
captured. The bodies of twenty-five dead Indians fell into the hands of 
the troops, but it was believed a much heavier loss was inflicted. The 
casualties to the troops were five men killed and twenty-five wounded, 
besides nineteen horses killed. In a very gallant charge upon the 
Indians, Lieutenant John A. McKinney, 4th Cavalry, was killed. 

The severity of the weather was intense, and being so encumbered by 
his wounded, Mackenzie rejoined the main column of the expedition 
which had been following him, all returning to the cantonment near 
Fort Reno. The thermometer was so far below zero that further active 
field operations, in such weather, were considered impracticable and they 
were, therefore, suspended for the winter. 

Meanwhile, in the Department of Dakota, the operations of Colonel 
Miles against Sitting Bull and his confederates were continued. On 
December 7th, First Lieutenant F. D. Baldwin, with Companies " G", 
"H", and "I", 5th Infantry, numbering one hundred officers and men, 
overtook Sitting Bull's camp of one hundred and ninety lodges, followed 
and drove it south of the Missouri, near the mouth of Bark Creek. The 
Indians resisted Baldwin's crossing of the river, for a short time and then 
retreated into the bad lands. On December 18th, this same force, under 
Lieutenant Baldwin, surprised Sitting Bull's band of one hundred and 
twenty-two lodges, near the head of the Red water, a southern affluent of 
the Missouri, capturing the entire camp and its contents, together with 
about sixty horses, ponies and mules. • The Indians escaped with little 
besides what they had upon their persons and scattered southward across 
the Yellowstone. 

The large cantonment at the mouth of the Tongue River having been 
established, from this point as a base, the pursuit of the remnants of the 
Sioux and Northern Cheyennes with Sitting Bull and Crazy Horse, was 
energetically pressed by the troops under Colonel Miles. The low state 
of water in the river, now gave the troops on the Yellowstone a three-fold 
task of great difficulty, to shelter themselves by building huts, to bring 
up their supplies by tedious hauling from the head of navigation, and to 
prosecute, simultaneously, in the midst of winter, vigorous field opera 
tions against the hostiles. 

On the 29th of December, Colonel Miles, with Companies " A", "C", 
"D", "E", and "K", 5th Infantry, and Companies " E", and " F", 22nd 
Infantry, numbering four hundred and thirty-six officers and men, with 
two pieces of artillery, moved out against the Sioux and Cheyennes 
under Crazy Horse, whose camp had been reported south of the Yellow 
stone, in the valley of Tongue River. As the column moved up 
the Tongue, the Indians abandoned their winter camps consisting of 
about six hundred lodges, and the column had two sharp skirmishes on 
the 1st and 3rd of January, driving the Indians up the valley of 
Tongue River, until the night of the 7th, when the advance captured a 
young warrior and seven Cheyenne women and children, who proved to 
be relatives of one of the head-men of the tribe. A determined attempt 
was made by the Indians to rescue the prisoners, and preparations were 
made for the severe fight to be expected the next day. On the morning 
of January 8th, about six hundred warriors appeared in front of the troops 
and an engagement followed, lasting about five hours. The fight took 
place in a canon, the Indians occupying a spur of the Wolf Mountain 
range, from which they were driven by repeated charges. The ground 
was covered with ice and snow to a depth of from one to three feet, and 
the latter portion of the engagement was fought in a blinding snow 
storm, the troops stumbling and falling, in scaling the ice and snow-cov 
ered cliffs from which the Indians were driven, with serious loss in killed 
and wounded, through the Wolf Mountains and in the direction of the 
Big Horn range. The troops lost three men killed and eight wounded. 
The column then returned to the cantonment at the mouth of Tongue 
River.

In the annual report for the year 1877, by Colonel Miles, 'commanding 
the district of the Yellowstone, the following summary of the operations 
of his troops against Indians in that District, for the years 1876 and 1877, 
appears; aggregate distance marched, over four thousand miles: besides 
the large amount of property captured and destroyed, sixteen hundred 
horses, ponies and mules were taken from the hostiles: each principal en 
gagement was followed by important surrenders of bands, and upwards 
of seven thousand Indians were either killed, captured, forced to sur 
render, or driven out of the country. 

September 29th, Lieutenant Bullis, 24th Infantry, with a small de 
tachment, pursued a band of hostile Lipans and attacked them in their 
camp, four miles from Saragossa, Mexico; he captured four squaws, one 
boy, twelve horses and two mules and destroyed the Indians' camp 
equipage. 

November 1st, near the Rio Grande, Lieutenant Bullis, 24th Infantry, 
with a detachment of thirty-seven Seminole scouts, had a fight with a 
band of renegade Apaches and other Indians. Captain S. B. M. Young, 
8th Cavalry, with a force of one hundred and sixty-two men, consisting 
of Troops "A" and "K", 8th Cavalry, and "C", 10th Cavalry, and Lieu 
tenant Bullis' detachment of scouts, after a very long pursuit, succeeded 
in surprising this band of Indians near the Carmen Mountains, Mexico, 
on November 29th. A charge by the troops dispersed the Indians in 
every direction, with a loss of their camp equipage, seventeen horses, six 
mules and some arms; one enlisted man was wounded. 

December 13th, at Ralston Flat, New Mexico, a detachment of Troops 
"C", "G", "H", and "L", 6th Cavalry, commanded by Lieutenant J. A. 
Rucker, 6th Cavalry, from the Department of Arizona, had a skirmish in 
which one Indian was killed; the same detachment had another fight with 
Indians in Las Animas mountains, New Mexico, December 18th, when 
fifteen more Indians were killed. 

In addition to engagements between Troops and Indians, in the 
Department of Texas, the following attacks were also specially reported 
by various post commanders: 

October 9th, 1876, Juan Marengo was killed at the mail station at 
Eagle Springs, Texas. 

Two men, named Kountz and Spears, mail carriers from Fort 
McKavett, Texas, were killed: date not given.