1880.
On January 2d, Victoria and his Indians were again reported raiding 
in southern New Mexico. All the cavalry in that section were pushed 
after him and on January 12th, a force commanded by Major Morrow, 
9th Cavalry, struck Victoria near the head of Puerco River, killing and 
wounding several of the hostiles, the troops losing one enlisted man 
killed and one Indian scout wounded; the fight lasted from two o'clock 
in the afternoon until sunset, when the Indians escaped. On January 
17th, Major Morrow's force again struck Victoria in the San Mateo 
Mountains, New Mexico, and drove him from his position, but with what 
loss could not be learned. Lieutenant French, 9th Cavalry, was killed 
and two scouts wounded. 

February 3d, a war party of Uncapapas attacked some citizens on 
Powder River, Montana; Sergeant Glover, Troop " B", 2d Cavalry, with 
eight men and eleven Indian scouts, pursued the hostiles for sixty-five 
miles and surrounded them near Pumpkin Creek, killing one Indian and 
wounding two, losing one soldier killed and one wounded; three Indians 
were prevented from escaping until the arrival of Captain Snyder, with a 
company of the 5th Infantry, when they all surrendered. 

February 6th, a band of Sioux stole fifteen horses from settlers in 
Pease's Bottom, on the Yellowstone, and a number of horses from camp 
at Terry's Landing; Crow Indian scouts pursued and overtook the 
Sioux, near Porcupine Creek and killed or recaptured all of the stolen 
stock. 

March 3d, Companies "I" and "K", 5th Infantry, left Fort Keogh, 
Montana, in pursuit of hostile Indians north of the Yellowstone, and on 
March 8th, after a continuous gallop of forty miles, Company "K" suc 
ceeded in surrounding the Indians, captured thirteen ponies and sixteen 
mules. 

Martfli 4th, two citizens were attacked by Indians on Alkali Creek, 
Montana and one of the men wounded. 

March 5th, Lieutenant Miller, 5th Infantry, with nine soldiers and 
eight Indian scouts, attacked a band of hostile Indians, thirty miles west 
of the Rosebud, Montana, killed three of the hostiles and eight of the 
ponies, captured some arms and a large amount of ammunition, and 
destroyed the hostile camp; two Indian scouts were killed in the affair; the 
Indians escaped across the Yellowstone, and were closely pursued by Captains
Baldwin, 5th Infantry, and Hamilton, 2d Cavalry. On March 9th, 
Captain Baldwin overtook the Indians, on Little Porcupine Creek, chased 
them for thirty miles and captured all their animals, excepting those on 
which they escaped. 

March 13th, the commanding officer of Fort Davis, Texas, reported 
the killing of a Mexican boy, a sheep herder, near Russell's ranch, Texas. 

March 24th, a party of thirty or forty Sioux ran of about thirty ponies 
belonging to the enlisted Crow scouts at Fort Custer, Montana; Captain 
J. Mix with Troop "M", 2d Cavalry, numbering forty-four officers and 
men, started in pursuit and after traveling sixty-five miles in eleven 
hours, overtook and engaged the hostiles, recapturing sixteen of the 
stolen stock. These Indians were also pursued by Lieutenant Coale, 
with Troop "C", 2d Cavalry, from Fort Custer, and by Captain Huggins, 
with Troop "E", 2d Cavalry, from Fort Keogh; Captain Huggins sur 
prised the camp, April 1st, captured five Indians, forty-six ponies and 
some arms; Lieutenant Coale had an engagement, April 1st, on a fork 
of O'Fallon's Creek, when one enlisted man was killed. 

The Mescalero Agency at the Fort Stanton, New Mexico, Reservation, 
had largely served as a base of supplies and recruits for the raiding 
parties of Victoria, and it was determined, with the consent of the Indian 
Department, to disarm and dismount the Indians there. Pursuant to 
directions from Headquarters Military Division of the Missouri. Generals 
Pope and Ord, commanding the Departments of the Missouri and Texas, 
arranged that a force under Colonel E. Hatch, 9th Cavalry, numbering 
four hundred cavalry, sixty infantry and seventy-five Indian scouts, 
should arrive at the Mescalero Agency simultaneously with Colonel 
Grierson, 10th Cavalry, and a force of the 10th Cavalry and 25th Infantry, 
numbering two hundred and eighty officers and men, from the Depart 
ment of Texas. 

On March 31st, Colonel Grierson's column, whilst passing Pecos Falls, 
Texas, learned of the stealing of stock from citizens in that vicinity, the 
previous night, and Lieutenant Esterly, with a detachment from Troops 
"F" and "L", 10th Cavalry, was sent in pursuit. On the third day 
Lieutenant Esterly overtook the Indians, one of whom was killed and 
eight head of stolen stock were recovered. 

On April 6th, Colonel Grierson detached Captain Lebo, with Troop 
"K", 10th Cavalry, to scout near the line of march, and on April 9th 
Captain Lebo attacked a camp of Indians at Shakehand Spring, about 
forty miles south of the Penasco, Texas, killed the chief of the band, 
captured four squaws and one child, and between twenty and thirty 
head of stock, destroyed the camp and recovered a Mexican boy, named 
Coyetano Garcia, who had been taken captive by the Indians. 

On April 8th, Colonel Hatch's command struck Victoria in a strongly 
fortified position in the San Andreas Mountains, New Mexico; three 
Indians were killed, Captain Carroll, 9th Cavalry, and seven men were 
wounded and twenty-five horses and mules belonging to the troops were 
killed; many of the Mescaleros and some Comanches were in the fight; 
their trail was followed to the Mescalero Agency. 

On April 16th, Colonels Hatch and Grierson, having duly arrived at 
the Mescalero Agency, the attempt was made to disarm and dismount 
the Indians, but a desperate effort was made by the Indians to escape, 
and ten warriors were killed, some forty more escaping; about two 
hundred ponies and mules were taken away from the Indians and two 
hundred and fifty Indians, men, women and children, were taken into 
the agency; from twenty to thirty guns, carbines and pistols were cap 
tured from the Indians and turned over to their agent. Major Morrow, 
with a portion of Colonel Hatch's force, pursued the escaping Indians 
and overtook them in Dog Canon, killed three warriors and captured 
twenty-five more head of stock. One party of the fugitives was pursued 
and attacked by a detachment of Troop " L", 10th Cavalry, commanded 
by Lieutenant Maxon; one Indian was killed and five horses captured. 

May 13th, the commanding officer of Fort Davis, Texas, reported 
that Mr. Jas. Grant and Mrs. H. Graham were killed, and H. Graham 
and D. Murphy wounded by Indians in Bass' Canon, Texas. 

After the disarming and dismounting of the Indians at the Mescalero 
Agency, Colonel Hatch began again the pursuit of Victoria, assisted by 
troops from the Department of Arizona, but the campaign resolved itself 
into a chase of the hostiles from one range of mountains to another, with 
frequent skirmishes, but no decisive fights, until the Indians again 
escaped into old Mexico, the Mexican government declining to allow 
further pursuit on their territory. One fight took place on May 24th, at 
the head of Polomas River, New Mexico, when fifty-five Indians were 
reported killed. On June 5th, Major Morrow, with four troops 9th Cav 
alry, struck the hostiles at Cook's Canon, New Mexico, killed ten and 
wounded three; one of the killed was a son of Victoria; a quantity of 
stock was also captured. 

June llth, Lieutenant Mills, 24th Infantry, with a detachment of 
Pueblo scouts, en route to join Colonel Grierson's command, was attacked 
by Indians in Canon Viejo, southwest of Fort Davis, Texas, his principal 
guide killed and several horses wounded. 

July 31st, the commanding officer of Fort Davis, Texas, reported that 
E. C. Baker, stage driver, and Frank Wyant, a passenger, were killed 
by Victoria's Indians eight miles west of Eagle Springs, Texas. 

July 31st, Colonel Grierson, 10th Cavalry, with a small party of six 
men, was attacked by Victoria's Indians between Quitman and Eagle 
Springs, Texas; Lieutenant Finley, with a detachment of fifteen men of 
Troop " G", J Oth Cavalry, came up, engaged the Indians and held them 
in check until the arrival of Captain Viele and Captain Nolan, with two 
troops of the 10th Cavalry, when, in an engagement lasting four hours, 
seven Indians were killed, a large number wounded and the hostiles 
pursued to the Rio Grande. Lieutenant Colladay, 10th Cavalry, was 
wounded and one enlisted man killed; ten horses of the troops were 
killed and five animals wounded. 

Colonel Grierson's troops continued the pursuit, and on August 3d, a 
detachment of cavalry and scouts had a fight near the Alamo, one soldier 
being wounded and one missing; several Indians and ponies were shot. 
The same day Captain Lebo with Troop " K", 10th Cavalry, followed an 
Indian trail to the top of the Sierra Diabolo, Texas, captured Victoria's 
supply camp of twenty-five head of cattle, a large quantity of beef and 
other provisions on pack animals, and pursued the Indians to Escondido. 

On August 4th, a detachment of Captain Kennedy's troop of the 10th 
Cavalry, struck the Indians near Bowen Springs, Guadaloupe Mountains, 
Texas, the detachment had one man killed and several horses shot; 
Captain Kennedy attacked and pursued the hostiles toward the Sacra 
mento Mountains, killing two Indians and shooting and capturing a few 
ponies. 

On August 6th, the Indians were struck again in Rattlesnake Canon 
and scattered in every direction; a train guarded by Company "H", 24th 
Infantry, Captain Gilmore, was then attacked by the Indians near this 
point, but the hostiles were repulsed with a loss of one killed and several 
wounded; altogether four Indians were killed, many were wounded and 
some ponies captured. 

On August 9th, the commanding officer Fort Davis, Texas, reported 
that General Byrne, of Fort Worth, Texas, was killed by Indians near 
old Fort Quitman. 

On August llth, Captain Nolan, with Troops -1K", 8th Cavalry, "A", 
10th Cavalry, some Lipan scouts and Texas rangers, struck Victoria's 
trail and pursued the hostiles to the Rio Grande, twelve miles below 
Quitman, August 13th, when the band were again driven into old 
Mexico. 

August 1st, company "H", 5th Infantry, left camp on Redwater. 
Montana, and marched toward Poplar Creek Agency, Montana. It 
returned to Fort Keogh August 14th, bringing in twenty lodges of 
surrendered hostile Indians. The same day Troop " E", 3d Cavalry, left 
camp on Willow Creek, Montana, and marched to the Missouri River, 
capturing twenty-four lodges of Minneconjous, numbering one hundred 
and forty persons, returning with them to Fort Keogh, August 14th. 

August 16th, Sergeant Devlin, Troop "F", 7th Cavalry, with a de 
tachment of eight men and three Indian scouts, followed a war party of 
Sioux and and struck them near the folks of the Box Elder Creek, Mon 
tana, killed two, wounded one and recaptured seven head of stock. 

August 19th, a detachment of Indian scouts struck a war party north
of the mouth of O'Fallon Creek, Montana, and recaptured eleven head of 
stock. 

September 8th, "Big Road" and two hundred Sioux, surrendered to 
the commanding officer of Fort Keogh, Montana. 

October 26th, at Fort Stanton, New Mexico, twenty-four Apaches, 
consisting of seven men and seventeen squaws and children, surrendered 
to the commanding officer at the Mescalero Agency. 

October 29th, a party of from thirty-five to fifty Indians, supposed to 
be a remnant of Victoria's band, attacked a picket party of twelve men 
belonging to the command of Captain Baldwin, 10th Cavalry, near Ojo 
Caliente, Texas; one Corporal and three private soldiers were killed. 
Captain Baldwin followed the Indians to the Rio Grande, across which 
they escaped. 

November llth, Lieutenant Kislingbury, llth Infantry, with a detach 
ment consisting of twelve men, 2d Cavalry, and ten Crow scouts, was 
attacked by a war party of Sioux near the mouth of the Musselshell, 
Montana, and had one horse killed and three wounded; one of the 
hostiles was reported killed. 

The Indians who had broken away, after the Sioux war of 1876-77, 
and had taken refuge in the British possessions, kept sending out raiding 
parties which committed depredations as far south as the Yellowstone 
and, when pursued by the troops, escaped again into the Northwest 
Territory. 

In September, 1880, a scout named Allison went from Fort Buford to 
communicate with Sitting Bull and other chiefs and, if possible, to induce 
the hostiles to come in and surrender. Allison made several visits to the 
hostiles and numbers came in to Poplar River Agency, Montana, in the 
latter part of 1880. At first these Indians seemed peaceable but, after 
they had collected in force, became turbulent and arrogant, assuming a 
threatening attitude toward the garrison at Poplar River which it became 
necessary, therefore, to increase. 

On December 15th, 1880, Major G. Ilges, 5th Infantry, with five 
mounted companies of his regiment, numbering about one hundred and 
eighty officers and men, left Fort Keogh and after a march of nearly two 
hundred miles through deep snow, with the thermometer ranging from 
ten to thirty-five degrees below zero, reinforced the garrison consisting 
of four companies of the 7th Infantry and one troop of the 7th Cavalry,
at Camp Poplar River.