1870.
On the 27th of September, 1869, the Superintendent of Indian Affairs 
for Montana, officially reported to the Commissioner of Indian Affairs 
renewed depredations by Indians, supposed to be Blackfeet, near Helena, 
Montana. A citizen name'd James Quail, having lost a quantity of horses 
and mules, went to hunt for them. His body was found pierced with 
arrows and horribly mutilated. Nine Indians were seen, a few days 
before, driving off stock from that direction, and within the preceding 
two months over four hundred horses and mules had been stolen. These 
papers were all referred by the War Department to the Division Com 
mander for action, and it was resolved, as soon as winter should set in 
and the Indians be unable to move, to send a force from Fort Ellis or 
Fort Shaw and strike them a hard blow. The project for punishing this 
band, numbering about fifteen hundred, (men, women and children,) hav 
ing been approved by the War Department, on January 19th a column, 
consisting of Troops " F", " G", " H", and " L", 2nd Cavalry and a 
detachment of about fifty-five mounted infantry, under Brevet Colonel 
E. M. Baker, 2nd Cavalry, left Fort Shaw, Montana, to strike the Piegan 
camp of " Mountain Chief", on the Marias River, Montana. 

January 23rd, after a secret night march, the column completely sur 
prised the camps of "Bear Chief" and "Big Horn", killing one hundred 
and seventy-three Indians, wounding twenty, capturing one hundred and 
forty women and children and over three hundred horses. Leaving a 
detachment in the camp to destroy the property, the column pushed down 
the river after the camp of " Mountain Chief", but his lodges were found 
deserted and were burned by the troops. The Indians scattered in every 
direction, but the weather was too severe to pursue them, so the column 
marched for the North West Fur Company's Station, arriving there on 
January 25th. Colonel Baker sent for the chiefs of the Bloods, had a 
consultation with them and obliged them to give up all the stolen stock 
in their possession. The column reached Fort Ellis again, February 6th, 
having made a march of about six hundred miles, in the coldest weather 
known for years, in the always severe climate of that region. In the 
attack on the Indian villages, the only loss to the troops was one man 
killed. 

March 21st, at Eagle Tail Station, Kansas, Indians attacked a railroad- 
working party but were driven off by the military guards; no casualties. 

April 6th, on Bluff Creek, Kansas, a government train and escort were 
attacked by Indians who were driven off with a loss of three wounded, 
but one hundred and thirty mules were stampeded. 

April 23rd, a railroad-working party in Kansas were attacked by 
Indians who were repulsed by the military guards; no casualties. 

May 4th, near Miner's Delight, Wyoming, Troop "D", 2nd Cavalry, 
Captain D. S. Gordon commanding, had a severe fight with a band of 
Indians, in which seven Indians were killed and one wounded. First 
Lieutenant Charles B. Stambaugh, 2nd Cavalry, and one enlisted man 
were killed.

May 16th, Indians made a concerted attack along the Kansas Pacific 
Railroad for a distance of thirty miles, .killing ten persons and running 
off about three hundred animals. A troop of cavalry pursued the Indians 
to the Republican River, Nebraska, but without success. 

May 17th, Sergeant Leonard and four men of Troop "C", 2nd Cavalry, 
were attacked by about fifty Indians, on Spring Creek, Nebraska. The 
party succeeded in driving off the Indians who lost one killed and seven 
wounded. 

May 18th, Indians attacked Lake Station, Colorado, and were pursued 
by a party of cavalry, but without success. 

May 21st, Hugo Station, Colorado, was attacked by Indians who 
were, however, repulsed. 

May 28th, near Camp Supply, Indian Territory, Indians attacked a 
train, stampeded all the mules, and killed one man. The same day they 
ran off a quantity of stock near that post and killed another man. 

May 31st, Carlysle Station, Kansas, was attacked by Indians; they 
were repulsed by the military guard who had two men wounded. The 
Indian loss, estimated, was three wounded. The same day, on Beaver 
Creek, Kansas, a detachment of Company " B", 3rd Infantry, under Ser 
geant Murray, had a fight in which one man was killed and one wounded. 

June 1st, Indians raided the settlements on Solomon River, Kansas. 
They were pursued by a troop of the 7th Cavalry and four Indians 
wounded. 

June 3rd, the mail station at Bear Creek, Kansas, was attacked by 
Indians who were repulsed by the military guard, after a severe fight in 
which two soldiers were killed and one wounded. Five Indians were 
killed and ten wounded. At other places in the Department of the Mis 
souri, the same day, a Mexican was killed and scalped, a train was 
attacked, a teamster killed and forty mules stampeded, and Captain 
Armes, 10th Cavalry, being separated from his escort, was attacked and 
chased, but escaped. 

June 6th, near Fort Selden, New Mexico, the Chief Engineer Officer, 
District of New Mexico, whilst surveying near that post, was attacked 
and two mules captured. Troops from the post pursued the Indians 
who, however, escaped. The same day, near Camp Supply, Indian Ter 
ritory, an attack on a train was repulsed. The same night Indians again 
attacked this train and were driven off. They also captured thirteen 
mules from a citizen train, near the post. Two Indians were wounded. 

June 8th, near Camp Supply, Indian Territory, the United States mail 
escort was attacked by Indians who were repulsed with a loss of three 
killed and five wounded; one soldier was wounded. On the same road, a 
government train guarded by a troop of cavalry, was attacked by 
Indians who were repulsed after a severe fight, in which three soldiers 
were wounded. Three Indians were killed and their wounded were esti 
mated at ten. Between Fort Dodge and Camp Supply, Indian Territory, 
Troops "F", and " H", 10th Cavalry, commanded by Lieutenant Boda- 
mer, 10th Cavalry, had a fight in which two soldiers and three Indians 
were wounded. The same day Indians made an attack near Fort 
McPherson, Nebraska, were pursued by Troop " I", 5th Cavalry, under 
Lieutenant Thomas and their camp attacked arid destroyed, the Indians 
escaping. 

June llth, near Bunker Hill Station, Kansas, cavalry couriers carry 
ing dispatches were attacked arid chased into the station. Near Camp 
Supply, Indian Territory, Indians attempted to stampede the horses at 
the cavalry camp. They were pursued by Troops "A", " F", " H", " I", 
and " K", 10th Cavalry, and Companies " B", " E", and " F", 3rd Infantry, 
commanded by Lieutenant Colonel A. D. Nelson, 3rd Infantry, were 
attacked, six Indians killed and ten wounded. Three soldiers were 
wounded and two cavalry horses killed. Near Grinnell Station, Kansas, 
a train escorted by cavalry was attacked by Indians who were repulsed 
after a fight of three hours; no casualties. 

June 13th, near Grinnell, Kansas, Indians attacked a railroad-working 
party but were repulsed by a detachment of cavalry; three Indians were 
killed and ten wounded. 

June 14th, a battalion of 7th Cavalry encountered a band of Indians 
on the Republican River, Kansas. The advance troop attacked the 
Indians who, however, escaped with a loss of one pony killed. 

June 15th, near Fort Bascom, New Mexico, Indians plundered a 
ranch, outraging, killing and scalping a woman, and stealing five horses 
belonging to the post trader. The Indians were fired upon by the guard, 
but escaped. 

June 16th, on Mulberry Creek, Kansas, Indians killed three wood 
choppers, horribly mutilating their bodies. 

June 21st, near Carson, Colorado, Indians attacked a Mexican train 
and killed five teamsters. Cavalry pursued the next day, but without 
success. 

June 25th, near Medicine Bow, Wyoming, a detachment of Troop "I",
2nd Cavalry, under Lieutenant C. T. Hall, had a fight with Indians; 
no details given. 

June 27th, at Pine Grove Meadow, Wyoming, a detachment of Troop 
"A", 2nd Cavalry, under Lieutenant R. H. Young, 4th Infantry, attacked 
a band of about two hundred Indians in the mountains. One soldier was 
wounded and fifteen Indians reported killed. The detachment not being 
strong enough to dislodge the Indians, the latter escaped. 

In August, a detachment of cavalry struck a band of Indians on the 
Washita River, Indian Territory, killing three and wounding ten Indians. 
Two soldiers were killed and five wounded. 

October 6th, near Looking Glass Creek, Nebraska, Troop " K", 2nd 
Cavalry, Captain J. Egan, had a fight in which one Indian was killed. 

October 16th, in the Guadaloupe Mountains, New Mexico, Troop " B", 
8th Cavalry, Captain W. M. McCleave, had a fight in which one Indian 
was killed and eight captured. 

October 30th, eighteen miles from Fort Stanton, New Mexico, Indians 
stampeded fifty-nine mules from a train. Cavalry pursued for two hun 
dred and fifty-five miles, destroyed the Indian village, recovered the 
mules and captured three squaws. 

November 10th, near Carson, Colorado, Indians stampeded sixty-eight 
mules from a Mexican train. 

November 18th, Indians attacked Lowell Station, Kansas, and killed 
one man. 

November , in the Guadaloupe Mountains, New Mexico, a detach 
ment of Troop "A", 8th Cavalry, under Lieutenant Pendleton Hunter, 
captured nine Indians. 
