1882.
April 23d, a detachment, consisting of six men and six Indian scouts, 
commanded by Lieutenant McDonald, 4th Cavalry, was attacked by a 
large band of Chiricahua Apaches, about twenty miles south of Stein's 
Pass, Arizona, and four of the scouts were killed. One of the scouts 
made his escape with the news, and Lieutenant Colonel G. A. Forsyth, 
with Troops "C", "F", "G", "H", and "M", 4th Cavalry, proceeded 
at a gallop for sixteen miles to the relief of the rest of Lieutenant 
McDonald's party, who were found still defending themselves. The 
hostiles fled on the approach of this column, were pursued and overtaken 
in a strongly intrenched position in Horse Shoe Canon, where the com 
mand dismounted and promptly attacked them among rocky ridges vary 
ing from four hundred to sixteen hundred feet high. The Indians were 
driven from rock to rock, among the mountains, until they dispersed in 
every direction and further immediate pursuit became impracticable; 
thirteen Indians were killed, a number wounded and a quantity of their 
animals captured. 

On April 28th, Captain Tupper, with Troops " G " and " M", 6th 
Cavalry, and a company of Indian scouts, all belonging to the Depart 
ment of Arizona, struck these Indians about twenty-five miles south of 
Cloverdale, surprised and attacked their camp, killed six of the hostiles 
and captured seventy-two head of stock. 

After Forsyth's fight in Horse Shoe Canon, he followed upon the 
trail and, joining forces with Captain Tupper after the latter had also 
attacked the hostiles, continued the pursuit into old Mexico. About ten 
miles from the scene of Tupper's fight, a squaw was found who stated 
that the Indians had lost thirteen killed in the fight with Forsyth, and 
six more in Tupper's attack. On April 30th Forsyth, met a column of 
Mexican troops, commanded by Colonel Garcia, who declined to allow 
further pursuit upon Mexican soil, and stated that his own troops had 
just destroyed the band Forsyth had chased into Mexico. Forsyth 
accompanied Garcia to the scene of the fight, which had lasted five hours, 
during which time the Mexicans had lost two officers and nineteen men 
killed, and three officers and ten men wounded; seventy-eight Indians 
were killed and thirty-three women and children were captured. The 
total thus known to be killed in the fights of Forsyth, Tupper and Garcia, 
was ninety-eight; about thirty Indians had also been wounded who escaped,
and two hundred and five horses and mules were killed or captured, before
the hostiles entered Mexico. 

April 29th, Lieutenant Morgan, 3d Cavalry, with a detachment of six 
men of Troop " K", 3d Cavalry, was sent from Fort Washakie, Wyoming, 
to arrest " Ute Jack", a chief of the White River Utes. Armed with a 
knife, " Ute Jack " resisted arrest and attempted to escape, when he 
was wounded in the arm by a shot from the guard. He then took refuge 
in an Indian teepee, where he obtained a carbine and succeeded in 
killing the sergeant of the detachment. Major Mason, 3d Cavalry, 
arrived on the spot and further measures were taken resulting in the 
capture and death of the Indian. 

June 23d, a party of hostile Apaches attempted to take refuge upon 
the Mescalero Agency at Fort Stanton, New Mexico. The agent, Mr. 
Llewellyn, assisted by some of the employes and Indian police, attempted 
to arrest the hostiles, when a fight occurred in which three of the hostiles 
were killed and Mr. Llewellyn wounded; the rest of the band, about 
seven or eight in number, escaped and fled from the reservation, pursued 
by a small detachment of troops and Indian scouts from Fort Stanton. 