1881.
On January 2d, 1881, leaving one company of infantry and detach 
ments of three other companies of infantry to guard the camp, Major 
Ilges moved, with a force of about three hundred officers and men, with 
two pieces of artillery, against some camps of Sioux, numbering about 
four hundred, who were located on the opposite side of the Missouri. 
Upon the approach of the troops the Indians fled from their villages and 
took refuge in some timber, from which they were quickly driven by a 
few shells and soon surrendered, to the number of over three hundred, 
under the terms already extended to all the hostiles, viz., that they should 
be disarmed and dismounted. Nearly two hundred ponies were given 
up, together with sixty-nine guns and pistols, as well as the camp 
equipage; eight Indians were killed in the attack and about sixty escaped 
and joined others in the vicinity. On January 9th, twenty additional 
Indians were captured and, on January 29th, eight more lodges, number 
ing sixty-four people, also surrendered to Major Ilges, with five guns and 
thirteen ponies. There were no casualties to the troops, during these 
operations, but many were very badly frozen through exposure to the 
terrible weather. 

On February 26th, three hundred and twenty-five hostile Sioux from 
what was generally called Sitting Bull's camp, with one hundred and 
fifty ponies and about forty guns and pistols, nearly all the guns being 
Winchester and Henry rifles, surrendered to Major Brotherton, 7th 
Infantry, commanding Fort Buford, Dakota. 

February 12th, Major Ilges, 5th Infantry, reported having arrested 
one hundred and eighty-five hostiles, forty-three of them being full 
grown warriors, in the Yanktonnais camp at Red Water, Montana; 
fifteen horses and seven guns were taken from the prisoners. 

April llth, one hundred and thirty-five hostiles, forty-five of them 
men, surrendered with their arms and ponies, to Major Brotherton, 7th 
Infantry, commanding Fort Buford, Dakota. 

April 18th, thirty-two lodges of hostile Sioux, numbering forty-seven 
men, thirty-nine women, twenty-five boys and forty-five girls, with fifty- 
seven ponies, sixteen guns and three revolvers, surrendered to Lieutenant 
Colonel Whistler, 5th Infantry, commanding Fort Keogh, Montana. 

May 24th, eight lodges of hostiles, numbering about fifty persons, 
twelve of them men, surrendered to the commanding officer at Camp 
Poplar River, Montana. 

May 26th, thirty-two hostile Indians surrendered to the commanding 
officer at Fort Buford, Dakota. 

July 20th, Sitting Bull, with the last of his followers, comprising 
forty-five men, sixty seven women and seventy-three children, surren 
dered to the commanding officer at Fort Buford, Dakota. 

On July 22d, there were turned over to the Indian agent at Standing 
Rock Agency, (Mr. J. A. Stephan,) two thousand eight hundred and 
twenty-nine Indian prisoners, with five hundred and forty-nine ponies 
and mules. 

In July, " Nana", with fifteen warriors, the remnant of "Victoria's" 
band, re-entered New Mexico, and reinforced by about twenty-five 
Mescaleros, whirled through the territory, plundering and killing a num 
ber of people. On the 17th of July, at Alamo Canon, New Mexico, a 
small party of these Indians ambushed chief packer Burgess and one 
man, belonging to a detachment commanded by Lieutenant Guilfoyle, 
9th Cavalry, wounded Burgess and captured three mules. On July 19th, 
Lieutenant Guilfoyle with his detachment of the 9th Cavalry and some 
Indian scouts, following a trail westward of Canon del Perro, New 
Mexico, had a skirmish with some of the hostiles near the Arena 
Blanca, where they had just killed two Mexicans and a woman; the 
party numbered about thirteen warriors, and succeeded in making their 
escape. On July 25th, Lieutenant Guilfoyle again struck the hostiles 
encamped in the San Andreas Mountains, New Mexico, captured two 
horses, twelve mules, many blankets and all the Indians' provisions; two 
of the hostiles were shot and believed to be killed, the others escaped, 
crossing the Rio Grande, six miles below San Jose", killing two miners 
and a Mexican in the flight. 

July 30th, four Mexicans were reported killed by the hostiles in the 
foot hills of the San Mateo Mountains. August 1st, a party of thirty-six 
citizens, commanded by a Mr. Mitchell, whilst at dinner in the Red Canon 
of the San Mateo Mountains, were surprised and defeated by the hostiles, 
losing one man killed and seven wounded, besides all their riding 
animals, thirty-eight in number; the Indians escaped. On August 3d, 
Lieutenant Guilfoyle's detachment again struck this band at Monica 
Springs, New Mexico, wounded two Indians and captured eleven head 
of stock, some saddles, blankets, etc. This band numbered about twenty 
or thirty warriors, led by Nana, and they had killed another Mexican, in 
escaping from Red Canon. At La Savoya, New Mexico, on August llth, 
Lieutenant Guilfoyle found that two Mexicans had been killed, and two 
women carried off by the hostiles. 

August 12th, Captain Parker, with a detachment of nineteen men of 
the 9th Cavalry, struck Nana's band, twenty-five miles west of Sabinal, 
New Mexico, lost one soldier killed, three wounded and one missing, but 
reported an equal loss inflicted upon the hostiles who then drew off; 
Captain Parker's small detachment, encumbered by their wounded, were 
unable to pursue. 

August 16th, Lieutenant Valois, with Troop " I", 9th Cavalry, had a 
severe fight with a band of about fifty Indians, near Cuchillo Negro, New 
Mexico; Lieutenant Burnett, 9th Cavalry, was wounded twice, two 
enlisted men and six horses were killed; the hostiles lost several killed. 
The same day Lieutenant Taylor, with a detachment of the 9th Cavalry, 
also had a fight with the hostiles, captured some horses and recovered 
some stolen property, losing, himself, a few horses killed; the hostiles 
were pursued toward the Black Range. 

August 18th, Lieutenant G. W. Smith, 9th Cavalry, with a detach 
ment of twenty men, struck the hostiles about fifteen miles from McEver's 
ranch, New Mexico. The Indians were defeated, after a very severe 
fight in which Lieutenant Smith and four of his men were killed; a party 
of citizens, under command of George Daly, joined Lieutenant Smith in 
the fight and Daly was killed. 

Altogether, eight troops of cavalry, eight companies of infantry and 
two Indian scouts were in the field, personally commanded by Colonel E. 
Hatch, 9th Cavalry, in pursuit of these Indians, and while no decisive 
engagement took place, the hostiles were persistently driven from one 
point to another, until they fled across the Mexican border, where, under 
positive orders from the Government, the chase was abandoned.

In the Department of Texas, the following murders were also specially 
reported : 

By the commanding officer, Fort Davis, Texas, January 8th, 1881; 
in Quitman Caiion, Texas, the stage driver and a passenger, named 
James Kelso, killed by unknown parties supposed to be Indians. 

By the commanding officer, Fort Clark, Texas; Allen Reiss and 
Mrs. McLauren, killed by Indians on the Rio Frio, Texas, about April 
24, 1881. 

By the commanding officer, Fort Davis, Texas; two railroad employes, 
named Bell and Smith, were killed by unknown parties, at a water hole 
between Quitman and Eagle Springs, Texas, about July 8, 1881. 