1878.
January 5th, sixty miles northwest of Presidio del Norte, Texas, six 
men were killed by Mescalero Apaches from the Fort Stanton reserva 
tion, New Mexico. (Reported by commanding officer Fort Davis, 
Texas.) 

January 16th, Colonel J. E. Smith, 14th Infantry, commanding officer 
at Fort Hall, Idaho, reported the surprise and capture by troops of his 
command, of a party of hostile Bannocks at the Ross Fork Agency, 
Idaho; ten warriors were disarmed and two hundred and fifty horses cap 
tured. 

On the same day, Companies "A", and "H", 25th Infantry, and 
Troop "H", 10th Cavalry, commanded by Captain Courtney, 25th Infan 
try, proceeded in pursuit of Indians who had raided Russell's ranch, on 
the Rio Grande, Texas, where four Mexicans had been killed and three 
wounded: the time which had elapsed before receiving news of the at 
tack, and the distance to be marched by the troops were so great, how 
ever, that the Indians could not be overtaken. The same day the com 
manding officer of Fort McKavett, Texas, reported Mr. Doty killed by 
Indians, near Brady City, Texas, and another person, name unknown, in 
Mason County, Texas. 

February 16th, Victorio Rios, and Sevoriano Elivano, were killed by 
Indians, at Point of Rocks, Limpia Canon, Texas. (Reported by com 
manding officer Fort Davis, Texas.) 

February 23rd, the commanding officer at Fort Clark, Texas, reported 
that R. W. Barry and Juan Dias were killed by Indians, on the Laredo 
road, twenty-three miles below Fort Duncan, Texas. 

April 15th, Lieutenant A. Geddes, 25th Infantry, with ten men of 
Troop "K", 10th Cavalry, pursued to the Carrizo Mountains, a band of 
Mescalero Apache Indians who had stolen twelve mules from a train near 
Fort Davis, Texas. The same day Lieutenant Bigelow, with twenty-five 
men of Troop "B", 10th Cavalry, pursued a band of Indians who had 
killed a mail rider near Escondido Station, Texas; the trail was followed 
for six days and the mail found, but the Indians could not be overtaken. 

April 17th, the following named persons were killed : W. M. Mc- 
CaJl, nine miles from Fort Quitman, Texas, Frederick B. Moore, at San 
Ygnacio, McMullen County, and Vicenti Robledo, near Brown's ranch, 
Texas; George and Dick Taylor were also killed, at Mr. Steele's ranch, 
on the Nueces River, Texas, by Li pan and Kickapoo Indians. (Reported 
by the commanding officers of Fort Davis, San Diego, and Fort Clark, 
Texas.) 

April 18th, Guadaloupe Basan was killed at Rancho Soledad, Duval 
County, Texas: near this ranch, on the same day, a Mexican shepherd 
and his wife were shot, tied together and thrown across a horse : John 
Jordan was also killed at Charco Escondido, Duval County, Texas. (Re 
ported by commanding officer of San Diego, Texas.) 

April 19th, Margarito Rodriguez was killed, ten miles west of Charco 
Escondido, Texas; at Quijotes Gordes, Texas, Jose Maria Caiiales was 
shot by Indians, thrown into his camp fire and his lower extremities con 
sumed. (Reported by commanding officer at San Diego, Texas.) . 

April 20th, Lonjinio Gonzales. mail rider, was killed near "Point of 
Rocks", eighteen miles north east of Fort Davis, Texas; also Florentine 
and another person, (name unknown); these were supposed to have been 
killed by Mescalero Apaches from Fort Stanton reservation, New Mex 
ico. (Reported by commanding officer at Fort Davis, Texas.) 

The hostiles who had broken away and followed Sitting Bull to the 
British Possessions in 1877, continued hovering in considerable numbers 
on both sides of the boundary. Reports were received of over four hun 
dred lodges having gone north, in various bands, since the 1st of Octo 
ber, preceding, so Colonel Miles, with about eight hundred mounted 
men from Fort Keogh, Montana, started in February for the purpose of 
finding a large force of Indians then on the south side of the line; 
instructions were sent from the War Department, not to attack them, 
however, if they remained north of the Missouri, so the expedition was 
recalled under these conditions. On April 2d, the United States Indian 
Agent at Fort Peck, hearing of the approach of a small force of troops 
under Lieutenant Baldwin, 5th Infantry, requested that officer to visit 
the agency, where small parties of well armed hostiles had been coming 
in constantly, professing a desire to cease hostilities, demanding food, 
making violent demonstrations when refused, and threatening the agent 
by firing over his head : Lieutenant Baldwin proceeded to the agency, 
leaving his troops on the south side of the river, and about April 25th he 
received the surrender of a small band, five or six of whom were war 
riors. 

June 1st, the commanding officer of Fort Clark, Texas, reported that 
two herders were killed at Mr. Nicholas Colson's ranch, twelve miles 
west of Camp Wood, Texas. 

June 28th, at Fort Sill, Indian Territory, a United States Marshal, 
with a guard of soldiers, commanded by Lieutenant Whitall, 16th Infan 
try, attempted to execute a writ for the arrest of Indians engaged in*an 
attempt to kill a man named Montgomery; the Indians resisting and 
drawing their knives upon Lieutenant Whitall and his guard, two Indians
were killed and one wounded. 

June 30th, Lieutenant C. R. Ward, with fifteen men of Troop "D", 
10th Cavalry, pursued a band of Indians who had stolen seven horses on 
the South Concho River, Texas; heavy rains having obliterated the trail, 
the pursuit was finally abandoned. 

Small parties of Nez Perec's having again committed murders and 
depredations in Montana, on July 15th, First Lieutenant T. S. Wallace, 
3rd Infantry, with a detachment of fifteen mounted men, started in pur 
suit : he overtook them near Middle Fork of the Clearwater, July 21st, 
killed six Indians and wounded three, captured thirty-one horses and 
mules, and killed twenty-three, without loss to his command. This party 
were supposed to be deserters from "White Bird's "band, on their way 
from British Columbia to their former homes in Idaho. 

August 3rd, Sergeant Claggett, with eleven men of Troop "H", 10th 
Cavalry, pursued to the Guadaloupe Mountains, a band of Indians who 
had killed a stage driver and run off stock at El Muerto, Texas. 

Hostile Bannock Indians from .the Department of the Columbia, pro 
ceeded eastward, over the Nez Perces trail of the previous year, stealing 
stock on the way; Captain J. Egan, with Troop "K", 2d Cavalry, pro 
ceeded up the Madison River, in the direction of Henry's Lake, and on 
August 27th struck a Bannock camp and captured fifty-six head of 
stock. 

Hearing of the approach of the Bannocks, Colonel Miles, with one 
hundred men of the 5th Infantry and a band of thirty-five Crow scouts, 
hastened to intercept the hostiles. A small party, under command of 
Lieutenant Clark, 2d Cavalry, was detached by Colonel Miles, to make 
a detour, and on the 29th and 80th of August struck parties of Ban 
nocks, inflicting some damage in each case. Colonel Miles continued up 
Clark's Fork of the Yellowstone, and on September 4th surprised a camp 
of Bannocks, killed eleven Indians and captured thirty-one, together 
with two hundred horses and mules: Captain Bennett, 5th Infantry, was 
killed, also the Interpreter and one Indian scout; one enlisted man was 
wounded. 

On September 12th, Lieutenant H. S. Bishop, 5th Cavalry, with a de 
tachment of thirty men and some Shoshone scouts, struck a party of 
Bannocks on a tributary of Snake River, Wyoming, killed one Indian 
and captured seven, together with eleven horses and three mules : the 
prisoners had escaped from the fight with Colonel Miles on Clark's Fork, 
September 4th, and reported that they had lost twenty-eight killed in 
that affair. 

After the extensive surrenders in 1877, of the hostile Northern Cheyennes,
in the Departments of Dakota and the Platte, a portion, number 
ing two hundred and thirty-five men, three hundred and twelve women 
and three hundred and eighty-six children, with four Arapahoes, were 
sent with a military guard from Fort Robinson, Nebraska, to the Cheyenne
and Arapahoe Agency, at Fort Reno, Indian Territory, where they 
were turned over to the Indian Agent on August 8th, 1877. 

Subsequent to that date, other small parties surrendered and some died, 
so that on July 1st, 1878, the number of Northern Cheyennes, at Fort 
Reno, Indian Territory, was nine hundred and forty-two. An attempt 
had been made by General Pope, commanding the Department of the 
Missouri, to disarm and dismount these Indians, so as to place them on 
the same footing with the Southern Cheyennes, but as it was found this 
could not be done without violation of the conditions of their surrender, 
they were permitted to retain their arms and ponies. 

A large part of these Northern Cheyennes found friends and kindred 
among the Southern Cheyennes at Fort Reno, mixed with them, and 
joined the various bands. About one-third of the Northern Cheyennes, 
however, under the leadership of "Dull Knife", "Wild Hog", "Little 
Wolf", and others, comprising about three hundred and seventy-five 
Indians, remained together and would not affiliate with the Southern 
Cheyennes. Dissatisfied with life at their new agency at Fort Reno, 
they determined to break away, move north and rejoin their friends 
in the country where they formerly lived. As nearly as could be 
ascertained, those who escaped from Fort Reno numbered eighty-nine 
men, one hundred and twelve women and one hundred and thirty-four 
children. Their intention to escape had long been suspected and their 
movements were consequently watched by the troops, but by abandon 
ing all their lodges, which they left standing, they stole away on the 
night of September 9th. Two troops of the 4th Cavalry, under Captain 
Rendlebrock, the only mounted force at Reno, started immediately in 
pursuit, and the garrisons were ordered out from Forts Supply, Dodge, 
Lyon and other places, near the Arkansas River, to intercept or overtake 
the escaping band; some cavalry was also ordered up to Fort Reno, from 
Fort Sill, to prevent an extension of this exodus, and two troops of the 
4th Cavalry, were also directed to march rapidly from Fort Elliott, Texas, 
to Fort Dodge. Besides these precautions, the garrisons of Fort Wal 
lace, two companies of 16th Infantry, Fort Hays, three companies of 3rd 
Infantry, and Fort Leavenworth, the latter consisting of one hundred 
mounted men of the 23rd Infantry, altogether two hundred and fifty men, 
were disposed along the line of the Kansas Pacific Railroad, to watch for 
the Cheyennes, should they succeed in eluding the troops upon the Ar 
kansas. 

In the Department of the Platte, dispositions of troops were made 
along the line of the Union Pacific Railroad, at points where the Indians 
might be expected to cross, should they escape between the detachments 
in the Department of the Missouri. 

On September 16th, Lieutenant Colonel Wm. H. Lewis, 19th Infan 
try, commanding officer at Fort Dodge, Kansas, reported that the Chey- 
ennes were raiding about the mouth of Bluff Creek, Indian Territory, 
and were driving off stock. Colonel Lewis sent all the force he could 
spare (about forty men of the 19th Infantry,) to Pierce ville, north of the 
Arkansas, and west of Fort Dodge, to try and strike the Indians, if they 
attempted to cross the river. On September 19th, he sent Captain 
Morse, with his company of thirty-five men of the 16th Infantry, ten 
more men of the 19th Infantry, and Troop "I", 4th Cavalry, all of whom 
had arrived at Fort Dodge, to assist in pursuit south of the Arkansas. 

All the operations along the line of the Arkansas were finally placed 
under direction of Colonel Lewis, whose force at last numbered about 
two hundred and fifty men, only one half of them being cavalry. 

On September 21st, about dark, the united companies of Captain 
Rendlebrock and Captain Morse, numbering about one hundred and fifty 
soldiers, with some fifty citizens, had a skirmish with the Indians on Sand 
Creek, south of the Arkansas, and again upon the following day. 

On the 24th of September the trail of the Indians was found north 
east of Pierceville, showing that they had succeeded in crossing the 
Arkansas, and on the morning of the 25th, Colonel Lewis, in command of 
all the detachments of troops in the immediate neighborhood, started in 
pursuit, his cavalry having only just arrived at Fort Dodge, after a very 
hard forced march from Fort Elliot, Texas. 

Colonel Lewis pursued rapidly in a northwest direction, through 
Kansas, until about five o'clock in the evening, on September 28th, when 
he overtook the Cheyennes on "Punished Woman's Fork "of the Smoky 
Hill River, where the Indians were found very strongly intrenched and 
waiting for the troops. Colonel Lewis attacked them at once, and in 
gallantly leading an assault upon their position, he was mortally wounded, 
dying the same night whilst being conveyed in an ambulance to the 
nearest military post, Fort Wallace, Kansas; three enlisted men were 
wounded, one Indian was found killed, and seventeen dead saddle ponies; 
sixty-two head of stock were captured. 

On the morning of September 28th, the senior surviving officer, 
Captain Mauck, 4th Cavalry, continued the pursuit and reached the 
Kansas Pacific Railroad, on the morning of September 29th, the Indians 
having succeeded in passing between the infantry detachments patrolling 
the line of that road, and having crossed the track near Carlyle, Kansas, 
during the night of September 28th. 

All the troops on the line of the Kansas Pacific Railroad, under com 
mand of Colonel Jeff. C. Davis, 23rd Infantry, were then pushed north 
ward in pursuit, as was also the cavalry under Captain Mauck, but the 
Indians tore through the country, murdering arid devastating the settlements
on the Beaver, the Solomon and the Republican, killing every
settler they encountered, remounting themselves with some two hundred 
and fifty horses stolen on the way, and abandoning about sixty worn 
out ponies in crossing the state of Kansas. 

On November llth, the Governor of Kansas in writing informed the 
Honorable Secretary of War that in this raid through his state the Chey- 
ennes had murdered over forty men and had ravished many women. 

Simultaneously with the escape from Fort Reno, of this party of 
Northern Cheyennes, under "Dull Knife" and other chiefs, a band of one 
hundred and eighty-two surrendered Northern Cheyennes, from Fort 
Keogh, Montana, were also moving, with a small military escort, towards 
the Indian Territory, to be located on the same reservation at Fort Reno. 
These Indians were at once halted at Fort Sidney, Nebraska, and for a 
time serious apprehensions were felt that they might learn of the escape 
of their people from the Indian Territory, and attempt to unite with them. 

The utmost activity prevailed on the part of the few troops which 
could be collected upon the line of the Union Pacific Railway, and a train 
of cars was kept ready at Sidney, with steam up, to rapidly throw all that 
could then be assembled, ( about one hundred and forty infantry and 
cavalry, under Major Thornburgh, 4th Infantry,) upon any point on the 
road where the fugitives from the south might attempt to cross. General 
Merritt, with the 5th Cavalry, was ordered to move as rapidly as possible 
to Fort Laramie, and Colonel Carlton, with the 3rd Cavalry, to Fort 
Robinson, while other troops in the Department also joined in the 
pursuit. 

In spite of all precautions, however, on October 4th the Cheyennes 
crossed the Union Pacific Railway at Alkali Station, a considerable 
distance east of Sidney. Within an hour after receipt of the news, Major 
Thornburgh, with the troops at Sidney, were on board of a train, hasten 
ing toward the place of the crossing. Captain Mauck, with the troops 
following on the trail from the Department of the Missouri, arrived only 
a few hours later. Major Thornburgh, with his small detachment of 
cavalry and mounted infantry, pushed ahead rapidly upon the trail, the 
rest of his infantry following in wagons as fast as they could, through a 
very difficult country, selected by the Indians, full of high hills of soft 
sand and destitute of water and grass: All of Thornburgh's wagons were 
soon abandoned and his troops pressed on, from October 6th, to October 
10th, with only such supplies as could be carried on their horses. On 
October 10th, Thornburgh's command, wholly out of rations, joined a 
column of five troops of the 3rd Cavalry, under Major Carlton, near the 
Niobrara River where, finding further immediate pursuit impracticable, 
the two commands marched to Camp Sheridan, Nebraska, having suffered 
severely for want of food and water, and being completely worn out by 
the hard pursuit through the sand hills. Captain Mauck's command was 
exhausted by their long march all the way from Texas and their rapid 
chase of the fugitives, so they moved to Fort Sidney, whence they con 
ducted the Northern Cheyenne prisoners, held there, to the Indian 
Territory. 

On October 15th, the commanding officer at Fort Robinson tele 
graphed that Indians had run off stock in that vicinity, so Major Carlton's 
column of the 3rd Cavalry started from Camp Sheridan for Fort Robinson. 
The same day the commanding officer of Fort Sidney reported the capture 
of two Cheyennes, by a party of cow boys, on Snake Creek; the prisoners 
stated the fugitives had intended to reach the Cheyennes supposed to be 
at Fort Keogh, Montana, where, if permitted to stay, they would them 
selves surrender, otherwise that they should try to join Sitting Bull who 
still remained in the British Possessions. These prisoners also stated, 
through Mr. Ben Clarke, Cheyenne Interpreter, that they had lost fifteen 
killed in the various fights subsequent to their escape from Fort Reno. 

The fugitives having now eluded capture in both the Departments of 
the Missouri and the Platte, the troops in the Department of Dakota 
were added to the pursuing forces, and on October 17th, Major Tilford, 
with nine troops of the 7th Cavalry, two companies of the 1st, and two of 
the llth Infantry, numbering four hundred and thirty enlisted men, 
reached Camp Sheridan, from Bear Buttes, (Fort Meade,) Dakota. 

On October 18th, Acting Indian Agent Tibbetts, Red Cloud Agency, 
reported the capture, by Red Cloud's Indians, of a party of ten of the 
fugitives. On October 21st, Major Carl ton reported that "American 
Horse", an Agency Indian, expressed the opinion that two parties of the 
Cheyennes had escaped northward, but that a third party still remained 
in the Sand Hills, and that the Agency Indians wanted to catch them, if 
they could keep their captured arms and horses. Major Carlton detached 
a force in search of this party, and on October 23rd, Captain J. B. John 
son, commanding Troops "B" and "D", 3rd Cavalry, captured one hun 
dred and forty-nine of the Cheyennes and one hundred and forty head of 
stock: Chiefs "Dull Knife", "Old Crow "and "Wild Hog", were among 
the prisoners. Their ponies were taken away, together with such arms 
as could then be found, but the prisoners said they would die, rather than 
be taken back to the Indian Territory. On October 25th, when told they 
must go to Fort Robinson, regarding this as a step toward the Indian 
Territory, they began digging rifle pits and constructing breastworks in 
their camp; a fight seemed inevitable, but by great coolness and good 
judgment, on the part of the officers, a collision was prevented : rein 
forcements, with two pieces of artillery arrived, when the Indians yielded 
and accompanied the troops to Fort Robinson, where all arms which 
could be found remaining, were taken from them and the prisoners were 
confined in an empty set of barracks. The remainder of the fugitives, 
under "Little Wolf", succeeded in making their escape, by scattering 
among the sand hills, where a dense snow covered their trail, though troops 
kept up the search until numbers of the soldiers were badly frozen. 

On October 5th, the commanding officer Fort Clark, Texas, reported 
that one boy and three girls, belonging to a family named Dowdy, were 
killed by Indians at a ranch on Johnson's Fork of the Gaudaloupe, 
Texas. 

October 22d, Major G. Ilges, 7th Infantry, with a detachment of 
troops from Fort Benton, Montana, captured a camp of thirty-five half- 
breed Indians, with eighty horses and fourteen guns, trespassers in Mon 
tana, from the British Possessions. The same day, John Sanders, a stage 
driver, was killed near Flat Rocks, Texas. (Reported by the command 
ing officer of Fort Stockton, Texas.) 

November 27th, the commanding officer of Fort Ellis, Montana, re 
ported that "Ten Doy", a friendly. Indian, had arrested seven hostile 
Bannocks, disarmed them and sent them under an Indian guard, to Colonel
Miles, at Tongue River.