1875.
The military operations against the bands in the Indian Territory, 
described during the last half of the year 1874, were continued during 
the winter of that year and well into the spring of 1875. The force 
brought from New Mexico under Major Price, 8th Cavalry, was consoli 
dated with that under Colonel Miles, and the whole expedition from the 
Department of the Missouri fell under the immediate command of the 
latter during the rest of the field operations. It consisted of eight troops 
of the 6th Cavalry under Majors Compton and Biddle, four troops of the 
8th Cavalry under Major Price, and four companies of the 5th Infantry. 
From July 21st, 1874, to February 12th, 1875, the whole, of this force was 
actively and incessantly employed in scouting the entire section infested 
by the Indian Territory bands keeping the Indians so constantly on the 
move that they were unable to lay in any stock of provisions. This 
active work was continued by the troops upon the exposed and barren 
plains of that region, during the whole of a winter of unprecedented 
severity and as the season advanced the difficulty of supplying the neces 
sary-forage and subsistence increased so that no little hardship and pri 
vation resulted, but the troops bore everything with fortitude and courage 
and without complaint. By extraordinary efforts enough supplies 
reached the troops to keep them in the field until their work was done 
and at length early in March, 1875, the Southern Cheyennes, completely 
broken down, gave up the contest arid under their principal chief, Stone 
Calf, the whole body of that tribe, with a trifling exception, surrendered 
themselves as prisoners of war, restoring at the same time the two elder 
Germaine girls who had been captives among them for nearly eight 
months. In surrendering, the Indians gave up their horses, which were 
sold, and witlT the proceeds were purchased herds of young beef cattle 
for the pastoral education of the Indians. Although the conditions of 
surrender required the Indians to deliver up their arms, only some 
guns and a large quantity of bows and arrows were turned in, the greater 
part of their more valuable fire-arms being hidden away where no search 
by the troops would be likely to find them. 

During the winter the Kiowas and Comanches, against whom the 
expeditions in the Department of Texas, under Colonels Mackenzie, 
Davidson and Buell had been compaigning with the most commendable 
energy, in co-operation with the column under Colonel Miles, went into 
Fort Sill, first in small parties and then in larger numbers, surrendering 
there in like manner. By the month of June, 1875, the last of the bands 
absent from their agencies, the Quehada Comanches, came into Fort Sill, 
Indian Territory, where they surrendered themselves with large numbers 
of ponies and mules, to Colonel R. S. Mackenzie commanding at that 
post. 

Orders were received, when the Indians began to surrender, to select 
from among them the principal ringleaders who had incited or led bands 
of hostiles in the recent outrages, to be sent to the sea coast and there be 
kept in confinement for a time at least. Seventy-five men were accord 
ingly picked out from the several tribes and were sent to St. Augustine, 
Florida. On April 6th, whilst shackling " Black Horse", one of the Chey- 
ennes who were thus to be disposed of, he broke from the guard and ran 
directly towards the camp of his people. He was "pursued by Captain 
Bennett, 5th Infantry, with the guard, who fired upon and killed " Black 
Horse" whose escape seemed certain without this alternative. The shots 
being in the direction of the Indian camp, several passed beyond the 
escaping prisoner and wounded some persons there. After a volley of 
bullets and arrows upon the guard, in the greatest excitement, about one 
half of the Cheyenne tribe fled to the sand hills on the south side of the 
Canadian, opposite the agency. The troops, consisting of Captain Ben 
nett's company of the 5th Infantry, with two troops of the 10th and one 
of the 6th Cavalry, all under command of Lieutenant Colonel T. H. Neill, 
6th Cavalry followed, but the Indians, well supplied with the fire-arms 
they had hidden in that vicinity, occupied a difficult hill and maintained 
themselves against the troops for several hours until nightfall. By night 
the troops had forced their way nearly to the crest of the hill occupied 
by the Indians, but at daylight it was found the enemy had fled during 
the night. Eleven Indians were found dead and nineteen soldiers were 
wounded. Troops from other posts in the vicinity were ordered to assist 
in the pursuit, and eventually most of the escaped Cheyennes gave them 
selves up. 

January 16th, a detachment of troops under Lieutenant F: S. Hinkle, 
5th Infantry, after a short chase captured a party of four Cheyennes near 
the Smoky Hill River, Kansas, south east of Fort Wallace. 

January 26th, Colonel Edward Hatch, 9th Cavalry, reported an attack 
by about from twenty to forty cattle thieves, upon a detachment consist 
ing of a Corporal and four men of Troop " G", 9th Cavalry, eighteen 
miles from Ringgold Barracks, Texas, two of the soldiers being killed. 
Colonel Hatch, with Troops " B", and " G", 9th Cavalry, captured a num 
ber of suspicious characters, two of whom were wounded in the attack 
upon the detachment. A coroner's jury found nine Mexicans, seven of 
whom were among Colonel Hatch's prisoners, guilty of the murder of the 
soldiers. 

February 23rd, Lieutenant Colonel J. W. Davidson, 10th Cavalry, 
reported the capture of a band of Kiowas on Salt Fork of Red River, 
Texas. The prisoners consisted of sixty-five men and one hundred and 
seventy-five women and children, with about three hundred ponies and 
seventy mules which were also captured. Among the prisoners were 
"Lone Wolf", "Red Otter" and "Lean Bull;" all surrendered uncondi 
tionally with their arms and ponies. 

April 6th, at the Cheyenne and Arapahoe Agency (now known as 
Fort Reno, Indian Territory,) took place the outbreak of the Cheyenne 
prisoners already described, and the attack upon them in an intrenched 
position, by the troops under command of Lieutenant Colonel T. H. Neill, 
6th Cavalry. 

A party of about sixty or seventy Cheyennes, consisting of the worst 
criminals of the tribe, those who had murdered the Germaine family and 
others, being afraid on that account to surrender with the rest, crossed 
the Arkansas River west of Fort Dodge and attempted to make their way 
to the Sioux country, north of the Platte. 

April 23rd, a detachment of forty men under Lieutenant A. Henley, 
6th Cavalry, struck this band in the north Fork of Sappa Creek, south 
east of Fort Wallace, Kansas, cut off twenty-seven of them from their 
ponies and demanded their surrender. The Indians replied by a volley, 
when Lieutenant Henley's detachment attacked them and nearly 
destroyed the whole party, nineteen warriors, including two chiefs and 
a medicine man, being killed. Over one hundred and twenty-five ponies 
were captured and the Indian camp burned, the balance of the band 
escaping northward. Two enlisted men were killed. 

April 26th, on the Pecos River, Texas, Lieutenant Bullis, with a 
detachment of three men of the 24th Infantry, surprised and attacked a 
band of about twenty-five Comanches, killed three and wounded one. 

May 5th, Sergeant Marshall, with a detachment of Troop "A", 10th 
Cavalry, attacked a band of Indians at Battle Point, Texas, wounded one 
Indian and captured his pony. 

June 3rd, Lieutenant J. A. McKinney, with a detachment of the 4th 
Cavalry, in pursuit of thieving Indians, overtook several Osages robbing 
a cattle herd on Hackberry Creek, Indian Territory. A Corporal and 
two men in advance attempted to arrest the Indians who began firing on 
the detachment and one Osage was killed. 

July 1st, on the Little Popoagie, Wyoming, First Sergeant Mitchell 
with a detachment Troop "D", 2nd Cavalry, had a fight with Indians,
killing two of them. 

July 6th, the Ponca Agency, Dakota, was attacked by a band of from 
one hundred and fifty to two hundred Sioux. Sergeant Danvers with a 
detachment of eleven men Company "G", 1st Infantry, posted at the 
agency, loaded an old cannon with pieces of iron and with this improvised
ammunition drove off the attacking party in three assaults, when 
the enemy withdrew. 

July 7th, near Camp Lewis, Montana, a band of about fifty Indians 
ran off a quantity of horses. A detachment of Company "G", 7th Infan 
try, under Lieutenant G. H. Wright, pursued the Indians, surprised and 
attacked them and recovered seven head of stolen horses. 

October 27th, Captain J. M. Hamilton with Troop "H", 5th Cavalry, 
from Fort Wallace, Kansas, had a fight with a ban'd of Indians near the 
Smoky Hill River, Kansas; two Indians were killed and one soldier 
wounded. 

November 2nd, Lieutenant A. Geddes, 25th Infantry, with two troops 
of the 10th Cavalry, attacked a band of Indians near the Pecos River, 
Texas, killed one and captured five. 

November 20th, a detachment of Troop "G", 3rd Cavalry, under Lieu 
tenant E. Crawford, had a fight with Indians near Antelope Station, 
Nebraska. 

A summary of the situation of affairs upon the Indian and the Rio 
Grande frontiers, is found in the following extract from the annual report 
of Lieutenant General P. H. Sheridan for 1875. 

"In the Department of Dakota, the military have had the double duty 
of protecting the settlements from the raids of hostile Indians, and the 
Black Hills country from occupation by miners attracted there by real or 
imaginary mineral wealth in the soil. The troops in the Department of 
the Platte have been mostly engaged in the same manner as those of the 
Department of Dakota. 

"I earnestly recommend some action which will settle this Black Hills 
question, and relieve us from an exceedingly disagreeable and embar 
rassing duty. I feel quite satisfied that all the country south of the Yel 
lowstone River, from the Black Hills of the Cheyenne as far west as the 
Big Horn Valley, and perhaps as far west as Clark's Fork of the Yellow 
stone, is gold bearing, but as to the amount of the gold deposit I cannot 
say; it may be great, or it may be small. 

"This area is also, at many places, well timbered, has many beautiful 
valleys of rather high altitude, with good soil and abundance of running 
water. I make this statement from having studied this country for a 
long time and in order that my superiors who will, before long, have to 
deal with the question of the Black Hills, may be able to better appre 
ciate the interests of all concerned, be they white or red. 

"The Sioux Indians, numbering about twenty-five thousand, now 
hold this extensive, and, perhaps, very valuable country, and in addition, 
the belt eastward from the base of the Black Hills of the Cheyenne to 
the Missouri River, which would make about ten thousand acres of land 
for the head of each family, and perhaps much more. 

"To meet the troubles which will originate from the Black Hills question,
to be in advance of them when they come, and be better able to 
deal with them, I directed, without expense to the Government, an 
exploration of the Yellowstone River last spring, and selected two sites 
for military posts, one at the mouth of the Big Horn, the other at the 
mouth of Tongue River, both in the valley of the Yellowstone. These 
stations can be supplied by steamboats and will have so important a bear 
ing on the settlement of the Sioux Indian question, that I earnestly 
recommend that Congress be called upon to give authority for their 
establishment, and the necessary funds for their construction. 

"In the Department of the Missouri, the campaign against the Chey- 
ennes, Kiowas and Comanches, was finished early in the spring, and the 
ringleaders and worst criminals separated from the tribes and sent to 
Fort Marion, Florida. 

"Nearly all the troops in the Department of Texas, except those along 
the Rio Grande frontier, were engaged in this campaign. Those sta 
tioned along the Rio Grande River, the boundary line between the 
United States and Mexico, have had the humiliating duty of attempting 
to protect our citizens and their property from raids by people of a 
foreign country, who come over the boundary in armed parties to steal 
cattle, and who do not hesitate to attack and kill our citizens, when 
necessary to accomplish their purposes. 

"The low stage of water in the Rio Grande and its great length — 
twelve hundred to fifteen hundred miles — makes the duty of protecting 
it difficult, in fact, almost impossible, with the few troops available for the 
purpose."