Sheridan in New Orleans.
How he is treated by the people.
A New Orleans Letter to the New York Times says:
The people of New Orleans never do anything by halves. To hate General Sheridan appears just now to be a religion with them; to defame him is evidently considered the duty of every good citizen. Everywhere—in street cars, bar-rooms, hotels, and even in churches—I have heard men and women abusing him. This abuse is sometimes very unjust, and all the charges brought against the General are made without consideration or thought. For instance, he is blamed for the action of the troops on the 4th instance, not withstanding the fact that he had not assumed command when the soldiers appeared in the State House, and cannot, therefore, be held responsible. This, however, is only a minor consideration. The troops were first called for by Democratic members, and their subsequent action might have been forgiven. It is the dispatch calling the people banditti which has caused Sheridan to be so intensely disliked. They feel that they have been insulted before the entire country, and it is one of their proud boasts that a "Louisianian never forgets an insult." This morning a conversation upon this subject, one of the best known citizens of New Orleans said to me, "We could have forgiven everthing else, we have already borne much and forgiven much, but this unnecessary insult we can not and will not forget." This feeling seems to pervade all classes of the community. The popular hatred of Sheridan finds expression in many ways. He has several times been hung in effigy, and half the shop windows in New Orleans are decorated with some ludicrous caricature of him. In some places figures of venerable and respectable looking old gentlemen are labeled. "This is one of the banditti." Many of the top stores display ridiculous French dolls with immense heads and very short legs, bearing the inscription: "I am not afraid." This, of course, has reference to Sheridan's dispatch stating that he had been threatented with assassination, but that he was not afraid. "I am not afraid," is now in everybody's mouth. The newsboys go through the street yelping out the usual "terrible murder in Arkansas," or "horrible cutting affair," always ending with "but I am not afraid." Several songs have already been composed, entitled, "I am not afraid", and in the theaters pert actresses are gaining popularity and loud applause by exclaiming in and out of season, "I am not afraid."
The General bears all this abuse and ridicule with commendable good nature and the utmost indifference. The other evening when he appeared in the hall of his hotel a number of unmannerly boors insulted him with hisses and suppressed exclamation of "I am not afraid;" he passed quietly through the crowd, paying no attention to impertinence. Every day as he takes his place at the dinner table, he is stared out of countenance by a number of a rude people, who respect neither his honorable position nor feelings of the ladles by whom he is accompanied: Nothing seems to disconcert or annoy him, however. He has seen enough to laugh at the petty insults referred to, and it is but justice to say that the mass of the people, although hating him with a bitter hatred, do not approve of the way he is treated by a few of their number. One incident in this connection I must not forget to mention. A few evenings since the General, accompanied by his Chief of Staff, visited the opera, and was assigned to a place in one of the stage boxes. Adjoining this was another box, in which a young and old lady were seated. The two apartments were separated by a partition, which did not extend quite to the front, a cushioned rail connecting them. The General took his place nearest this partition, and naturally laid his arm on the rail which I have mentioned. As he did so every opera-glass in the house was leveled at him, and the old lady who was seated in the box next to him excitedly motioned her young charge to move back from the place she occupied. The girl, who sat next the partition, and consequently very near Sheridan, at once drew her chair back from the rail into the corner of her box. It was very evident that the General was unconscious of the movement made by his neighbors. He did no, indeed, notice their presence, yet it was at once whispered all over the theater that the young lady was obliged to vacate her place because Sheridan had rudely placed his arm on her hand, which, as the story goes, was resting on the rail. Now,what is called Sheridan's ungentlemanly behavior is the chief topic of conversation in half the fashionable saloons, of New Orleans, and whenever he appears in public he is greeted by the black frowns of indignant women. This does not appear to trouble him much, however.