EXPEDITION THROUGH THE BIG HORN MOUNTAINS,
YELLOWSTONE PARK, ETC.
REPORT OF LIEUTENANT-GENERAL P. H. SHERIDAN.
Headquarters Military Division of tiie Missouri,
Chicago, 111., September 20, 1881.
General: For tlie purpose of acquiring additional knowledge of the
interesting country in and about the Big Horn Mountains, and the valleys of the Big Horn, Grey Bull, and Stinking Water, and Clark’s Fork,
lying west of and between the Big Horn and the main chain of the
Rocky Mountains, and thence crossing the main chain to the National
Park, I started on July 27, accompanied by General Delos B. Sacket,
Inspector-General, U. S. A., Lieut. Cols. M. V. Sheridan, and James F.
Gregory, of my staff; General M. D. Hardin, retired; General William
E. Strong, Mr. Samuel Johnson and Mr. E. N. Sheldon, of Chicago'; and
Dr. W. 1*. Wesselhoft and son, of Boston, and proceeded by the Union
Pacific Railroad to Rock Creek Station, and from thence due north by
land transportation to Fort Fetterman, distant 85 miles from Rock
Creek Station. This journey from the railroad was made in one day.
The country traveled over was, for the most part, uninteresting, except
at a few points, until Fort Fetterman was reached, just before sundown,
July 30. Although the country was unsettled, large herds of cattle, for
some distance from the railroad and about Fort Fetterman, indicated
the presence of numerous cattle ranches.
Resting at Fetterman the night of July 30, at an early hour next morning we started for Powder River, traveling in a general direction nearly
northwest, crossing the south and north forks of the Belle Fourche, which
. river, with the South Fork of the Cheyenne, almost encircles the Black
Hills, reaching Powder River before sunset, July 31, distant from Fetterman CO miles.
The country traveled over was rolling, and to some extent sandy, with,
abundance of sage brush, sparsely watered, but, strange to say, was occupied by some of the largest herds of cattle in Wyoming, and the ranges
were considered excellent. South of the line traveled this day, all the
way down to the Union Pacific Railroad, large herds of cattle and comfortable cattle ranches are to be found.
Powder River Valley, where we rested for the night, is not prepossessing, especially about the crossing, but up and down the river, from
this point, it offers to the cattleman pastures of great value, and is occupied by thousands of cattle. We stopped near the post of old Fort Reno,
abandoned long ago. All that is necessary in this valley for cultivation,
with satisfactory results, is industry and irrigation, for which latter the
river oilers good inducements as there is sufficient water.
The next morning, August 1, we made an early start, and almost from
the moment we left the valley of the Powder River, traveling northwestward, we discovered an improvement in the soil and grasses. At about
12 m. we reached Fort McKinney, named after an officer killed in an
engagement which Colonel Mackenzie had with the Northern Cheyennes,
not very distant from this military post.
McKinney is truly, in location and surroundings, a beautiful post. It
is on Clear Fork of Powder River, with good, fine granite soil underfoot.
The quarters for officers and men are fairly comfortable, but wanting in
repairs and other improvements in detail. Ditches conveying pure, clear
water encircle the parade ground, in front of the quarters of the officers
and men, and empty out into an extensive garden, on a lower plateau,
just below and behind the post.
Early on the morning of August 2 we resumed our march through the
undulating country lying between the base of the Big Horn Mountains
and Wolf Mountains—a much lower range farther to the north aud east—
reaching Tongue River, distant 55 miles, about two o’clock in the afternoon.
The country between Clear Fork, Fort McKinney', and Tongue River
is excellent in soil, and, for natural nutritious grasses, the best I have
ever seen, with the exception, perhaps, of the pastures of the higher
ranges of the Big Horn Mountains and like ranges on the main chain of
the Rocky Mountains, along Clark’s Fork, where the grazing can only
be for the summer months.
Between McKinney and Tongue River there are numerous streams,
the valleys of which are being settled up by thrifty farmers, with extensive fields of wheat, oats, and barley. The vegetable gardens were
excellent, the varieties embracing most of those raised in eastern sections of our country. The fields of wheat, oats, and barley were of
better quality and greater in quantity, to the acre, than those seen on
the east side of the Missouri.
The streams coming down from the Big Horn Mountains, and emptying into the Clear Fork of Powder River and Tongue River, are numerous, the grasses strong and nutritious—bunch grass preponderating.
The same character of country continues on northward across the Little
Horn and Greasy Grass Creeks, with even an improvement of the soil
and a greater variety of grasses, all the way to the Big Horn River,
disla it about 75 miles.
At a distance of 15 or 20 miles north of Tongue River, in the direction
of old Fort C. F. Smith, the eastern line of the reservation of the Crows
is reached, and no settlement of this valuable country has been permitted. The Crows have never occupied it heretofore, and never could hold
it until the Northern Cheyennes, Sioux, and Arapahoes were driven out
by the war of 1876. This country now forms part of the Crow Reservation, which contains about six and a quarter millions of acres, and as the
whole number of Crows does not exceed 3,500, this gives each man,
woman, and child in the tribe about 2,000 acres. The greater portion
of it should be purchased from them by the government, for what it is
worth to them, and opened to settlement, and but a short time would
elapse until it would be densely covered by thrifty farmers and by thousands and thousands of cattle.
In former times, the country between the Yellowstone Valley and the
base of the Big Horn Mountains was the winter range of the great
northern herd of buffalo. They are now being killed off and replaced
by a better and more useful animal—the cattle of civilization.
That portion of this valuable country claimed and acknowledged by
the government as belonging to the Crow Nation, never did belong to
them by conquest or occupation, so far as is known. It was held by the
Northern Cheyennes and their allies, the Sioux and Arapahoes, and
occupied by these people for a long- period. After the military, in 1S76,
drove out these tribes, who held it at least by right of conquest, and
certaiidy by that of possession, the Crows came in to spread their blankets on their soil, as they said, and gather berries ami roots for a month
or two in the summer. It is too valuable to remain idle for such insignificant productions.
The country between the eastern base of the Big Horn Range and the
Wolf and Rosebud Mountains, and down to the Yellowstone River, is
from about 90 to 150 miles in width and ISO in length; if it had added
to it that portion of the Crow Reservation between the Little Big Horn
and the Big Horn Rivers, it would have an encouraging future. The
streams which run from the mountains into the Clear Fork, Tongue
River, and Little Horn are clear and rapid, and the valleys are broad.
The soil is good, except in the broken Bad Lands down towards the Yellowstone, and is fully as susceptible of cultivation as other settled lands
this side of the Missouri, and iu my judgment will produce, independent
of irrigation, after two or three plowings. The pasturage is the best,
for the year round, of any section of the United States. There is no
record of very bad winter snows, last winter being the worst ever known.
There are no heavy or continuous rains iu the late summer and fall, and
the grass makes good, dry hay on the stalk, instead of falling to the
ground and rotting, as is the case in the east and south. When I visited this country, less than four years ago, it was the land of the Indian
and the buffalo; nowit has numerous farms and cattle ranches, with
cattle by the thousands, this side of the Little Horn.
At G a. m., August 4, we moved from the banks of Tongue River and
ascended the grassy, precipitous slope of the Big Horn Mountains,
north of Tongue River, making a steep ascent to the first elevated
ridge, which commanded a view to the north and eastward, well on to
the valley of the Yellowstone River. We continued for the day gradually ascending, in a direction parallel with Tongue River, and passing
through a succession of grassy parks encircled by pine timber, until we
reached a point near the junction of the north and south forks, where
we encamped. Next day we resumed our march, following up the North
Fork through beautiful natural parks, larger and more interesting than
on the day previous; in fact, they were almost as complete in beauty
as those cultivated by the hand and skill of man. Passing over the
main divide, nearly 10,000 feet in altitude, we made camp in a beautiful
resting place for the night. From this camp we could look over to the
west and see an extensive country, iu which runs the Wind River—with
the Grey Bull and Stinking Water Rivers in the distance—and far beyond these rivers, and from whence they take their .source, we could see
the main line of the Rocky Mountains. There are few places, if any,
where a grander or more interesting view can be had.
During our succeeding marches from this camp, we crossed innumerable streams of pure, cold water, most of them having their source in
large flowing springs. Next day we continued our march towards old
Fort O. F. Smith, and well along the summit of the mountains, through
parks similar to those mentioned, tufted with a luxuriant growth of
bunch and garna grasses. On the succeeding day, in the line of marching, we again came down the mountain on the edge of the Black Canon,
and from the overhanging bank we looked down to its parky meadow
bottom, 2,900 feet below—a rare and interesting picture that it is hoped
will be placed on canvas by the highest order of talent at some future
day.
On August 8 we reached the old abandoned military post of Fort 0.
F. Smith, and encamped on the banks of the Big Horn. Here we found
the Big Horn too deep to ford, but the commanding officer at Fort Custer, 40 miles below, had, in accordance with instructions sent him, a
company of cavalry and two boats to ferry us across. The animals were
driven into the stream and swam over.
On tbe morning of August 10, at six, we resumed our march and crossed
over a grassy country, making for Pryor’s Gap. We encamped on Sage
Creek.
Next day we resumed the march, encamping for the night on Pryor’s
Fork of the Yellowstone, a bold running stream filled with large trout,
from which the command took several hundred, varying in size from 14
to 24 pounds. The valley of Pryor’s Fiver is broad, with fine alluvial
soil. Just below on the river, distant 4 or 5 miles, was an encampment
of 70 or 80 lodges of Crow Indians, the first of this tribe we had seen,
except our guides, although, while in the Big Horn Mountains, we
passed near by a large camp who were there for a short time gathering berries.
In the last two days we had crossed the Big Horn Yalley, rather narrow at our line of march, but widening out further down towards the
Yellowstone. From where we crossed this valley, to the Yellowstone,
it is about 75 miles in length and from 10 to 15 miles broad. It has excellent soil and good grasses for grazing purposes. The country from
this over to Pryor’s Fork is higher, with several streams coming down
from Pryor’s Mountains, and is unequaled for grazing purposes, from
the good grasses and from the freedom from snow in the winter. It is
subjected in the winter to warm winds, called out there the “Chanook”
winds, which cause the snow to melt and be absorbed rapidly.
On August 12 we resumed the march, passing Pryor’s Gap, a low and
easy passage-way, with a picturesque and abrupt mountain on either
side. This gap had been the scene of a contest between the Crow Indians on one side and the Northern Cheyennes and Sioux on the other,
several years ago, in which, according to the testimony of our Crow
guide, tlieir side had been successful. Numerous piles of stones, conical
in shape, some large and some small, marked the resting places of those
killed in this engagement. Each of our guides deposited, according to
the custom of their people, tobacco, pipes, coin, or some articles taken
from their persons, as offerings to their companions whose bones rested
under these heaps of stones.
We made a very long march this day, crossing Sage Creek and a level
plain somewhat covered with sage brush, until we reached Bridger’s
road, and thence through a remarkably bad section of Bad Lands until
we encamped on Clark’s Fork of the Yellowstone for the night. Next
day we resumed our march up Clark’s Fork, skirted by Bad Lands on
the left and a high, broken, grassy, rolling country across Clark’s Fork
on the light. Down Clark’s Fork towards the Yellowstone, as far as
we could see, the valley looked well, but on the line of our march up
the stream, while the soil was good, irrigation will be necessary to get
good results, in grasses or from cultivation. It resembles the soil of
the Salt Lake Yalley, before Mormon industry anil irrigation had made
it, as\it now is, so fertile and bountiful.
The direction we wished to take up Clark’s Fork had to be abandoned,
as it required us to cross the river many times, and the water was too
high for fording. We therefore made a new trail by keeping on the
west side of tlie river, occasionally being forced by bluffy banks to pass
out into the Bad Lands, to round a point. This river offers, from the
rapidity of the current and its generally low banks, the best facilities
for irrigation, at small expense, that I have seen anywhere.
On August 14 we reached the base of the main chain of the Eocky
Mountains, not far from the mouth of Clark’s Fork Canon.
At six, on the morning of August 15, we commenced the ascent of the
main chain of the Eocky Mountains, at this point called Clark’s Fork
Mountain, and not far distant from the mouth of the canon of Clark’s
Fork Eiver. This canon ranks in length and in grandeur of scenery
with the canons of the Yellowstone, the Arkansas, the Animas, and
the Colorado; it is 24 miles in length, and at places nearly 3,000 feet in
depth. We passed up the mountain range, sometimes on foot and
sometimes on horseback, until we reached the summit ridge, and, turning along the ridge through a succession of grassy parks, inclosed with
beautiful varieties of pine and cedar, we reached a point commanding
a view of surprising magnificence. To the east the summit of the Big
Horn Eange was in view, distant over 100 miles, while intermediate was
the smaller range of Pryor’s Mountains. To the south were the valleys
of Wind Eiver, Grey Bull, and Stinking Water, and, encircling these
valleys, farther to the southwest, were the Shoshone and Wind Eiver
Eanges, with their lines of perpetual snow, extending around to old
Camp Stambaugh. In the valley of Stinking Eiver were the isolated
peaks of Hart and Cedar Mountains, and bearing more to the northwest were the high peaks of the Stinking Eiver Mountains, the snow
range, and Bear Tooth Mountains, while up the valley of Clark’s Fork
and near where it takes its rise, standing up against the sky, were Pilot
Knob and Index Peak, the great landmarks of the Eocky Mountains.
After feasting our eyes on this view, unparalleled iu grandeur and extent, we continued our march through grassy parks until we reached
the edge of the valley of Indian Creek, which was to be our camp for
the night. We made the descent of 1,900 feet into the valley, in a distance less than a mile. Horse and man did considerable sliding in getting down this precipitous descent. Indian Creek empties into Clark’s
Fork, and onr camp was in a beautiful spot not far from its mouth.
Next morning, at six, jre resumed our march, following up Clark’s
Fork to Crandle’s Creek, encamping iu its valley, and not far distant
from the main river. Here game was very abundant. However, no
distinction in this respect should be made, for elk, deer, antelope, mountain sheep, bear, mountain grouse Eichardson grouse, sage chickens,
and trout were abundant on the whole line of our march from Tongue River.
As it was necessary to give a day’s rest for the repair of pack-saddles
and readjustment of packs, word was sent round that we would remain in
this beautiful camp for the next day. A party was at once organized, consisting of Colonel Sheridan, General Strong, Mr. Sheldon, with Campbell, the guide, and Patrick, one of the head packers, to go over to the
frozen lakes near the foot of Bear Tooth Eange, and take an evening’s
hunt for elk. The distance was about 10 miles. They killed, iu the
evening, seven elk, and could have killed many more, as the country
was occupied by hundreds of these beautiful animals. One herd of 150
amused them by swimming with their young in the lake, taking, as it
were, an evening bath. The party did not kill any more, as the orders
were that no more game should be killed than could be consumed by
the command. The elk killed were very fat, and of fine flavor. Previous to this time we had killed twelve or thirteen along the route of
our daily marches, which, with the other game we killed in the same
way, kept our large command bountifully supplied with fresh meat.
On August 18, at six, we resumed our march up Clark’s Fork, the
trail being much rougher than on any day previous, and encamped at
the base of Pilot Knob and Index Peak.
Next morning, at six, we resumed our march, passing along the base
of Pilot Knob and Index Peak, and, turning the latter to the northward
we crossed over the summit of the mountains, and encamped on Soda
Butte Creek, a tributary of the Upper Yellowstone.
Just after crossing the divide, we struck a mining camp, where we
found a few miners wi tli, I think, good claims. They were there watching
their claims, but could not work them, as they were, unfortunately, on
the Ci’ow Reservation, but just on the edge of it. Two or three of these
men had been there for eight or nine years, waiting for some Congressional action to permit them to make their fortunes. If such relief should
come I believe they will do well, as they have good “ prospects,” and there
are plenty more of the same kind in the neighborhood. It would be
well if Congress could give relief to these poor fellows. Some of them, at
least, located without knowing that they were on the Crow Reservation;
subsequently, the Crows wanted to give up all their present reservation,
and to go over to the Judith Basin, and there were, for a long time,
doubts as to what were the limits of the reservation, or where it would
be. This mining country is of no use to the Crows, and should be purchased by the government at a nominal price, and should be thrown
open to add to our gold and silver production.
At the usual hour in the morning of August 20 we resumed our journey down Soda Butte Creek, passing by an extinct geyser, and about eight
o’clock reached and crossed the east branch of the Yellowstone River,
thence proceeding down the valley of this stream until near its junction
with the main river, when we crossed over on Baronette’s Bridge, making
our camp on the west side. While coming down the valley of Soda
Butte Creek we had crossed the liue and entered the Yellowstone Park.
Early next morning we resumed our march via Tower Falls and Mount
Washburn; thence up the cafiou of the Yellowstone, encamping at the
great falls.
On the morning of August 22 we resumed the march, passing by
Sulphur Mountain, the Devil’s Caldron, Mud Geysers, where we made
an early camp, most of our party going up to the Yellowstone Lake, but
a few miles distant. Next morning, at the usual hour, we resumed our
march, passing through large open parks, alternating with dense pine
woods, and one or two low, swampy bottoms, making by our day’s
journey the Lower Geyser Basin, encamping very near the Fountain
Geyser, and the crater of the Paint Pots. Next day we continued our
journey, crossing the Lower Geyser Basin, and up the valley of the Fire
Hole River to the Upper Geyser Basin, pitching our camp only a few
hundred yards from the geyser known as Old Faithful. From this camp
we had the pleasure of witnessing, during our stay, the action of nearly
all the grand geysers of this wonderful place, so fully described by
Barlow, Hayden, and others. The phenomena witnessed was fully up
to and exceeded our expectations. Our only regret is the indifference
shown by the government, probably from want of appreciation of the
wonders of this interesting country. The area of the park is 3,300
square miles; the altitude is high; the surface is covered by open
grassy parks, surrounded by dense pine forests, and having near its
center the Yellowstone Canon, and the Upper, Lower, and Middle
Geyser Basins. We found the forests on tire for miles, at five or six
different places. The craters of many of the geysers, where the water
was spouted up as high as 200 feet in column, were partly wedged
up by good sized trees pushed in with the butt end down, so that our
large force of men could not pull them out, and visitors, men, women,
and children, with axes, hatchets, and hammers, were there then, mutilating the craters of the geysers in the most wanton and provoking
manner.
The Congressional appropriation of $15,000 annually for this park
out of which comes the salary of the superintendent and game-keeper,
and perhaps some incidental expenses, is too small to give much of a
balance for the improvement of the roads and trails, so that really the
work done in the summer has to be so temporary that it is washed out
by the winter rains. These two men cannot take care of this extensive
park. A larger appropriation should be given by Congress, and an engineer officer should be detailed to expend it on improvement of the
trails and roads, with a company or two of calvary to be stationed in the
park for the summer, to watch and prevent the burning of forests, and
the mutilation of the craters and other singular phenomena of the
geysers.
On August 27 we took up the line of march down the Fire Hole
River, encamping at the foot of the Lower Geyser Basin, and next day
crossed over to the Madison, thence up that river, leaving it at the foot
of Tyhee Pass, through which our direction led over to Henry Lake,
and thence down Henry’s Fork of Snake River, and over to Camas Station, on the Utah Northern Railroad, where we took cars for Ogden,
and thence by the Union Pacific Railroad for home.
The Tyhee Pass at Henry Lake is very low. One can scarcely realize
that he is passing through one of the gaps of the Rocky Mountains. A
railroad could be constructed from Williams Junction, on the Utah
Northern Division of the Union Pacific Railroad, or from several other
points not far distant, by Henry Lake and Tyhee Pass down the Madison and through the short canon of Gibbon’s Fork, and up the Fire Hole
River to the Upper Geyser Basin, on almost a mimimum grade.
At Camas Station we separated from our escort, which was directed
to return to Fort Laramie, via the Teton and Union Passes, to the head
waters of Wind River, thence down that river to Fort Washakie, on the
Shoshone Reservation, and thence home by the nearest and most practicable route.
Our troops had never gone through this pass, and but little was
known of the route except to the Shoshone Indians. I submit the very
interesting report of Colonel Kellogg, whose company formed our escort,
descriptive ot this route. I also submit the exceedingly interesting report of Surgeon W. H. Forwood on the fiora of the country passed over on
our long but exceedingly interesting expedition. We had no sickness,
no accidents, and our escort and pack trains were returned to Fort Laramie in good condition, after having traveled some 1,600 miles. A map
of the Yellowstone National Park, Big Horn Mountains, and adjacent
country, prepared in the office of the Chief Engineer ot this Division, is
trnsmitted herewith.
I have the honor to be, general, very respectfully, your obedient
servant,
P. II. SHERIDAN,
Lieutenant-General, Commanding.